it will not be a surprise to any of you  that i'm making a video today talking  about  the life of the mind  you might be wondering how i'm possibly  going to justify the title of this video  however  mentioning aaron janus nina and randa  in the same sentence as the life of the  mind  just two days ago  there was a very memorable broadcast  from aaron janice's instagram  about 100 other  human beings witnessed this along with  myself she commented  during this broadcast that somebody  somewhere should record it and download  it i don't think anyone did  uh  aaron attended a political protest  and she engaged in  ranting and exhortations  that i could best compare to the  presidential campaign  of  kanye west  if you're not familiar with this genre  you could look up right now and come  back to the channel  kanye west  slavery rant  at tmz offices  it was this level of  incoherence  and let's be clear  what we're talking about  is a combination of  ignorance  stupidity  self-righteousness  and almost messianic  self-confidence  a sense of purpose and objective that  they're not just saying something you  know being stupid happens to people and  being ignorant happens to us all we're  all born ignorant and if you don't have  any real experience of being stupid you  probably is not a very good memory  because we've all been through that too  but the combination of that  with this  messianic  ranting sense of self-confidence that's  what brings back for me memories of  kanye west and witnessing this  i don't know monologue it wasn't wrong  she was talking to other protesters at  this protest this very very strange  broadcast from aaron janus now not  surprisingly many people in that  audience audience of about 100 people  they don't know aaron the way i do  and you guys may have guessed as much as  i have criticized aaron on this channel  i've also respected her privacy that's  true of everybody it's true even of  durianrider and freely i know private  things with them i've never said on the  internet and i never would say i have my  own code of honor about these things  a lot of people in the audience do not  know aaron the way i know aaron  and they were insisting  that she was high on drugs  during the process so many people were  saying this and some of them were like  attributing their conclusion to  particular things one guy was saying  look at her tongue someone else said oh  you can tell by her eyelid movement or  something no no she this this is her in  a manic state on a you know high on  drugs  and  you know i was trying to find a nice way  to say it and i think i did i didn't say  anything offensive but i i wrote a  comment saying no  guys if you know aaron  this this is what she's like stone cold  sober this is her sober with no makeup  and no hair  i don't mean no hair in this  no no no effort put into her hair makeup  this is  the real hero janice this is what she's  what she's like so she by the way she  responded to that she wasn't really  offended but she insisted in response to  some of those comments in the audience  that no she  she wasn't on any drugs and she hadn't  she wasn't hung over and wasn't had  anything else  now  you know a man slipping on a banana peel  in a vacuum  is not comedy you know what makes it  funny  is the  context you place that  you know so if it is the president of  the united states  who has just been lecturing  the vice president  and we know  in the audience the vice president is  actively engaged in a plot to  assassinate the president states in  order to replace this is a this is a  tremendously tense  situation and exactly the issue they  disagree on which is the reason for the  plot  uh  this is what they're confronting each  other about in a whole hallway with  tremendous seriousness and then  the president  slips on a banana peel and then he  begins furiously pointing at his  different aids and demanding to know who  ate this banana  now you've got comedy right it's the  it's the contrast between these  incongruous elements now what makes this  example of aaron janus  worth talking about today  whether you think of it as comic or  tragic frankly um it isn't just that  she's stupid it isn't just that she's  slipping on a banana people it isn't  just that she's ignorant it isn't just  that she's wrong  you know  the tragedy from my perspective is you  can see she's really reaching out for  the meaning of life  she is reaching out to have a more  meaningful life and the reason why she's  at this political protest and the way in  which she's reaching out to and talking  to these other protesters and the way in  which she's reaching out to the audience  this is someone who wants to have  a meaningful life and  the meaning of life and living a  meaningful life it has everything to do  with politics at every  scale  i was just saying my girlfriend earlier  today i've started learning spanish i'm  at level zero in spanish so i'm thinking  more about places like mexico that  weren't on my mind so much lately  mexico  in terms of its climate and geography  ought to be  paradise it ought to be one of the most  wonderful  places  on this earth you could possibly live  i could say the same about malaysia  i could say the same about  indonesia  why don't you want to retire in  indonesia  why don't you want to go on vacation  to malaysia  how do you feel about mexico okay  the reason why mexico is not paradise is  political it's political  and cultural  you may feel powerless at first when  you're thinking about politics and  culture but the main message of my  channel again and again and again is  that what you have power over  is the culture of one  it's the politics  of one  one person you political change begins  with you and even if it ends with you  even if your pico culture  picoculture meaning something much much  smaller than a subculture even if your  pico culture and even if your political  movement  has no adherence except you yourself by  striking out your own direction this way  but deciding to live your own life in  your own terms politically and  culturally rather than compromising with  rather than living life that's  derivative of  the  the politics and culture that that  surround you right that's how you secure  for yourself you know the way to  a meaningful life  you may not have the option of leaving  indonesia you were born and raised in  indonesia the only language you can  speak is bahasa indonesia this kind of  thing you financially whether you were  born in indonesia you were born in  malaysia you were born in mexico and you  may well say you don't have the power  or the talent or the resources to  transform the culture of this nation of  millions of people that surrounds you  right and i don't have the power  or resources to transform canada i don't  i don't think i can influence the future  of canada even as much as i can  influence the future and politics of  laos a tiny communist dictatorship i  used to i used to live in oliver was  asking me that the other day i had a  little bit of influence in laos partly  because it's just such a tiny such a  tidy country  um you could meet people in government  pretty easily there um you know i may be  completely powerless right  but it begins with the politics of one  it begins with the culture of one it  begins with you and how you're gonna  live your life now gotta say the only  area of discourse i know people speak in  these terms is fashion  people talk about being a fashion victim  as opposed to having your own style you  know  that you are someone who doesn't choose  to follow fashion you are asserting what  ought to be in fashion by the clothes  you wear and you know i mean there are  people like this there are people who  are quote-unquote taste makers  rather than followers now obviously  fashion is the most shallow and insipid  nonsense and why bother  [Music]  but i'm pointing out um you know i don't  know of any discourse like that that  even extends to reading books  you know that no no no really you  shouldn't be reading the best selling  books or the most popular books the  books that other people think are  interesting or profound or even the  other books people think are politically  important  that actually in the same way that you  should be someone who sets the trend  someone who changes fashion someone who  challenges fashion with your own sense  of style you know that you should in the  same way be challenging the norm in your  in your culture and by the way you  should be doing it  even when it involves  taking risks um there was a time  when having spiky hair  was a kind of risk and an active  rebellion as stupid as that now sounds i  know maybe somewhere in the world  certainly in myanmar myanmar the  government's very restrictive about  men's hairstyles one example is this  maybe there is still somewhere i hate to  use the term because it is somewhat  racist but you know the mohawk hairstyle  for example you know there was a time  when this this was  what job could you possibly have if you  had more perhaps today it's the opposite  perhaps many jobs require you to have a  mohawk as a as a hairstyle but you know  this is i'm pointing out this is an  incredibly shallow theater or workshop  for cultural change or a laboratory for  culture you think of it as a set of  experiments right  a laboratory for cultural change the  world of fashion the world of style the  world of trends  well why is it we think so little about  this outside of that strange  uh shallow world you know  [Music]  we have this great term to be a fashion  victim  to be a victim  of what happens to be in  in fashion what's what's the opposite of  that  fashion hero  [Laughter]  you know we don't have a concept of  being an intellectual victim  of being a political victim of being a  cultural victim  that's exactly what you are  to be honest  all of us  up to a certain age  and a certain stage  you know that's that's what we were  and there was a stage in which i had no  idea how to live a meaningful life i had  no idea how to educate myself about  politics and nobody else was going to  help me i had no idea how to be an  intellectual i remember oliver all of us  in the audience now oliver was shocked  when i told him this is this is many  decades ago this would have been the  1980s  uh i remember watching uh the films of  woody allen  woody allen made some  relatively pretentious relatively  intellectual films with little little  bits of political commentary in them  because i was trying to figure out what  what do real intellectuals do  real intellectuals watch and appreciate  the films of woody allen quite a number  of french and uh italian avant-garde  filmmakers i also also watched that time  in my life and it's all garbage i mean  like in this i was a i was a fashion  victim you know how how are you gonna  figure out uh this came up the other day  for totally ridiculous reasons both  melissa and a friend of mine on  instagram  were asking me about  my history with chess  yeah i do have a history with actually  formally studying chess and playing  chess i figured out it's no different  from a video game  i really don't regard chess as any more  intellectually sophisticated than  playing virtua fighter two  i i didn't say virtual fighter one i  said virtual fighter two guys that's  it's a more sophisticated game the  virtual one you know um  so you know this this ended up with me  you know  abandoning chess as vanity of vanities  why did i why did i get involved with  chess right there was this compelling  cultural illusion this is what this is  what men of genius do even you know this  is what people with real  intellectual refinement do that they sit  down and and play chess  uh now you know there were many others  and also the idea that a real  intellectual smoked cigarettes and drank  alcohol was very much built into the  culture and at that time i have to say  chess was politicized in the 1980s  the face-off between the soviet union  and the united states of america there  was really the sense that there were the  the geniuses representing the soviet  union representing communism and the  geniuses representing western democracy  and they came together to play chess  to decide  who had more geniuses i guess you know  um just as in our times people come  together to play street fighter 5  and uh call of duty and uh rainbow six  uh just as in our times uh world of  warcraft and other fine  fine games determine the future and fate  of nations  you guys may not know but there's a very  very famous um  very very famous ping pong match in the  history of china that was very important  uh politically for the history of china  in the united states  and people used to use the terms ping  pong diplomacy and ping pong politics  but if you said that today people would  assign some other meaning to it okay so  you know you look at someone like uh  aaron janus  and i'll tell you how i feel about it  and you know i may be wrong on this on  this particular issue i may be wrong  when i look at aaron janus  when i look at nina and randa  i don't see someone who is biologically  different from me  i don't see someone who is  doomed  by fate or by an innate biological  condition to forever be  uh intellectually inferior i don't  now you know  maybe i'm wrong  you know in the case of uh nina and  randa they could have any number of  health conditions they've never  disclosed to the public i can imagine  they have any number of disabilities you  know it's  it's possible they have some kind of  serious learning disability i don't know  about but even then many of the learning  disabilities of our time are  medically unreal and there are a lot of  diagnoses in our time like depression  that are popular but have have no  scientific basis partly speaking well  you know i  i you know  in this very simple sense at this stage  i have to disclaim maybe i'm wrong  and you know  i think some people uh could write in  who have real disabilities and could  talk about look i appreciate this  philosophy or your preaching but there's  no way they can practice it because they  really are born with some combination of  you know debilitating uh health problems  or or physical physically real  medical abnormalities i had one longtime  viewer of the channel  who had uh an abnormality in her brain  that showed up on x-rays and mri scans  and it was slowly killing her too  she talked about her struggle to lead a  life of the mind and to be an  intellectual with a very real um  physical impairment  so  it exists  um  and as i've mentioned many times i do  have one half-brother who was born  severely mentally disabled  and i i understand i mean in his case  it's brain damage you know in simplest  sense there's a sense in which you know  you  this advice  to say it falls on deaf ears is another  statement it's it's something that's not  going to be applicable to everyone's  life  but i've got to tell you um  whether we're talking about males or  females on youtube  most of these people  i really do regard as my equals i regard  them as people were born with  in this sense  as much innate  capacity ability talent as i had and one  of the reasons for that is i remember  how stupid i was okay i remember what it  was like being stupid and ignorant and  brainless i i i'm not i mean i think a  lot of people get deluded about that  they get deloaded deluded about the  progress they made and and how they they  made it like i can say to you straight  up there was a time when i was as stupid  as nina and miranda you know  i grew out of it  and part of what we're talking about  here is simply the question  of why they haven't now i'm going to  deal with something at this stage  that i don't want the whole video to be  if you guys have we can talk about  whatever you guys ask questions about  whatever your whatever your own concerns  or problems are frankly and living the  meaningful life we're going to read this  to you from a really lousy translation  of seneca this is the ancient uh  roman philosopher and playwright really  is a playwright sack all right i i've  warned you already translate the  translation is lousy  greetings from seneca to his friend  lucillus continue to act thus my dear  lucillus set yourself free for your own  sake gather and save your time which  till lately has been forced from you or  filched away or has merely slipped from  your hands  make yourself believe the truth of my  words that certain moments are torn from  us that some are gently removed and that  others glide beyond our reach  the most disgraceful kind of loss  however is that due to carelessness  furthermore if you will pay close  attention to the problem  you will find that the largest portion  of our life passes while we are while we  are doing ill  i don't like the doing ill this could be  a better translator but i continue  a goodly share sorry terribly english  language  a goodly share while we are doing  nothing  and the whole while we are doing that  which is not to our purpose  what man can you show me who places any  value on his time  who reckons the worth of ej who  understands that he is dying daily  for we are mistaken when we look forward  to death  the major portion of death has already  passed  whatever years behind us  are in death's hands  therefore lucillus  do as you write me that you are doing  hold every hour in your grasp  lay hold of today's task and you will  not need to depend so much upon  tomorrow's  while we are postpo  while we are postponing life speeds by  nothing lucillus is ours  except time  i i can go on  we are entrusted by nature with the  ownership of this single thing  so fleeting and slippery that anyone who  can will oust us from its possessions  for me so  i did read uh  seneca when i was very young  and i was so young that i'm aware that  i've forgotten it  um  i should i should make time i really  don't have time to do more of this  reading now  if i reread seneca i will probably have  to examine the extent to which all of my  later  philosophy was actually  influenced by seneca by that one author  i think in many people back when i was  engaging in debates about video game  addiction and quitting video games i  think many people were just astonished  at my attitude towards time well i  wasn't the only one  and you know i mean it's easy for me to  say i've always been like this  well when did i first form that idea  about time  it's very painful for me to remember to  be honest i can remember when my  attitude changed and it's it's it's not  something i like to think about  um but there you go there's one  touchstone in my intellectual  development and someone else who you  know again it's not  that's largely stated in terms of regret  of looking back on your life and  realizing to what extent you you  squandered  the opportunities that you had  i raised it here for this reason you  know  with the exception of people who have  innate disabilities that really impair  them intellectually i do actually think  of myself as equal to other people not  as being born with some special  advantage  for that same reason i take it very  seriously when people make the decision  to own a dog  now the two things are how much time and  how much money do you think it takes to  be an intellectual how much time how  much money do you think it takes to to  develop in this way  obviously nina and randa have the time  obviously he never had to have the money  they're wealthy and lesser people  but not everyone is in need and randa's  position not everyone is in aaron  genesis position you know admittedly um  [Music]  if you own a dog  some people in this audience own  several dogs have you ever thought about  putting a clock on how much time  goes into that dog  you probably  wouldn't  be able to measure it in one day or one  week or one month you probably have to  measure it over a whole year  how often do you shampoo the dog how  often do you get its hair cut how often  you take it to the vet how often do you  walk it feed it pick up its poo you know  that a lot of stages go into  caring for just one pet  there are other reasons why i'm morally  opposed to pet ownership by the way so  oh oh oh so like cleaning up after the  pet like when they make uh  yeah so you see  melissa knows um so yeah i knew a guy he  was a bodybuilder he was a vegan  bodybuilder and he cleaned all of the  fur out of his whole apartment every day  first thing in the morning he had this  completely spotless apartment he was a  very heterosexual guy i mean a lot of  what he talked to me about when he was  out chasing women but i remember saying  to him look i've seen those pictures of  your apartment i understand why there's  this rumor that you're secretly gay  because it's so it's so clean it's so  tight like the way you keep your it's  just mind-blowing and he taught he  replied he talked me through his  schedule and  cleaning up the fur cleaning up the mess  you know they break things okay  um  i wouldn't be talking about this if i  think if i thought it didn't make a  difference if i thought some people are  just born with no talent and are doomed  and determined to be idiots their whole  lives and again i've already made the  concession  you know some people are so severely  [ __ ] some people are born mentally  impaired where their their options are  very limited in life i get it but with  that aside um  whether you're talking about aaron janus  nina randa or you know  ali hardesty another youtuber of coming  on or anision or anyone else  you know you think you think it doesn't  matter this time you're putting into uh  taking care of uh taking care of a dog  and again something you do every day so  it takes at least minutes if not hours  out of your day every day and i see it  here  yeah sorry i just i see people who are  putting in the time walk their dog  multiple times per day every day you  know we see that surrounding us that  that kind of culture  well  what if you spent those minutes  developing your mind pursuing the life  of the mind  i don't even have to have to fill it in  for you you know now  many video games today not all many  they'll actually  give you a clock it's  surprising that so many video game  programmers do that because it must  discourage people from playing games  that when you log in and log out because  you've played this game for three hours  today and a total of 300 hours this year  you know you must  some people must feel guilty looking at  that i don't know must regret what  they're doing well you don't get a clock  on walking your dog right now another  one  keeping it all the way real you don't  get a clock on quarreling with your  girlfriend quarreling with your  boyfriend  i've been through some relationships you  know and all the hours you're putting  into talking to this person about their  emotional problems or just  who does the dishes whatever you  whatever you fight over whatever you  quarrel over you know what i mean if you  put a clock on that right well you could  be  developing yourself again i if if i were  a fatalist if i were a pessimist i  wouldn't i wouldn't even think this way  because you look at nina you look at  randa you look at aaron janice and you  just think oh well that's it this is the  lot you're born to in life so go ahead  walk your dog play video games play uh  counter strike go online you know  whatever play  speed run mario 64. whatever you do go  ahead and waste your time because  there's nothing better you could be  doing anyway there's no no progress that  you're that you're capable of  now  this live stream from  you know aaron janus it brings up a  number of other  illustrations of what the the  our culture  encourages us  to be childish  our whole lives long  i remember reading a description of  japanese culture from over 100 years ago  i'll just digress to mention i was very  interested in the books that were  written  by europeans describing cultures in asia  at an early enough stage that the  stereotypes weren't established yet so  to give an example uh  people who came from  i was gonna say people who came from the  dutch people who came from the  netherlands  uh to sri lanka  their encounter with sherlock at that  stage you know and they didn't have any  preformed notion of what you know the  people are culture sri lanka like their  description of i read a little bit from  the portuguese at that time there wasn't  that much available in english  translation and i couldn't read  portuguese portuguese explorers but the  very first british people and someone to  set foot in some of these places and  encounter the culture and how they  described it how they reacted to it and  also to describe the politics by the way  you know and to describe the religion  buddhism and so on what was that  outsider's perspective at that stage  before those those stereotypes have been  formed anyway i remember reading um a  description of japan and it wasn't it  wasn't that ancient this one was more  than 100 years ago  and this guy  uh  said of the japanese you know  um they are doomed to imitate us in all  of our excesses  no other culture uh could be more  childish and no other culture could be  more obsessed with playing at being  serious sober mature and profound  this description of the playfulness of  japanese culture and the childlike  quality of japanese that you're  encouraged to be like a child your whole  life that today on the internet you know  today with the the availability of  japanese pop culture you know the west  is easy to see but this is at a time  when japan had no electricity yet you  know this is kind of amazing and also  the fact that his judgment was that the  japanese were going to imitate  everything going on in europe and the  western world wow  this guy had their number that showed up  in japan evaluated the whole uh the  whole culture anyway it's interesting  these are not really not explorers you  know you're past the exploration stage  these are people who are going and  really uh doing kind of  anthropology  uh extramuros kind of thing extra bulgy  not pardon me anthropology not defined  as such  um  you know  it is a little bit different for a man  and a woman  it's a little bit different if you're  beautiful or plain if you're handsome or  ugly you know  so i hesitate to say especially for  good-looking women but there is this  tremendous cultural pressure on you to  be childish you are encouraged and  rewarded for being childish  um partly because it makes other people  feel safe  you know  it makes other people feel relaxed makes  other people feel there are no  expectations on them and if you go  around in this culture being a serious  intellectual  well i could digress into how badly or  treated even at cambridge university  even at oxford university even at london  school of economics certainly at the  university of toronto on terrible  universities have spent time out here  you know why can't you just relax bro  everyone else is just here to party  everyone else is just here to live lives  of live a life of totally reckless  self-indulgent totally brainless  self-indulgence that's what most people  are doing on university campuses even  the most elite and most expensive and if  you're the one guy who's actually  living life an intellectual a lot of  people react to that negatively  um i'll be interested to hear if  switzerland turns out to be any  different oliver  uh as the years go by maybe we'll uh  maybe we'll get a contrasting  perspective and maybe we'll get  everything no it's just i know the swiss  like to drink too the swiss also know  how to know how to party  but you know my feeling about many of  these people  um  and i would include  men like james aspie in this you know  it's not just women i could include men  like james aspect men like anissia and  that little kind of man you know for our  purposes here when you look at aaron  janus  when you look at um  nina and randa  i see people who have been encouraged to  keep this childlike behavior child like  in success  including you know singing and dancing  on the internet like you're a child you  know really childish childlike activity  being encouraged and being and being  rewarded  and then you come up to this breaking  point  you know you come up to this breaking  point in your life where under whatever  circumstance either by your own choice  your own volition  or due to circumstances beyond your  control it's put upon you  that you suddenly have to make the leap  to really  thinking and talking and acting like an  adult thinking and talking and acting  like an intellectual like a person of  real substance you know aaron janus  nobody else was filming her to embarrass  her she's embarrassing herself she's the  one filming and broadcasting this and  here she is holding forth  on 20th century politics  you know what what am i going to say  just to summarize what she was saying  she was she was claiming that there's  nuclear war coming  that there's about to be a nuclear war  with china  he's talking about politics being russia  in the united states  she she was narrating as incoherently as  kanye west but she was covering the big  issues in in politics  now i've got to say something i'm not  saying this to insults uh aaron i'm not  i have met people  at  cambridge university england who were  just as ignorant as that people who were  in the phd program some of them had just  finished the picture i have met people  at that same level of ignorance master's  degree and phd at elite universities and  i have met people  stupider than that  elite level m.a phd university and i  have met people  crazier than that um to what extent  craziness comes into it you know  kind of a complicating factor and  interesting questions to what extent  what we're talking about here  maybe  stupidity and ignorance maybe they look  a lot like insanity  just when you have someone who's only  prepared to behave and act like a child  in a culture that encourages  childishness and childlike behavior and  then all of a sudden there were adult  expectations that were intellectual  expectations why can't you step up you  know we all know why you can't step up  right like  we say someone is an idiot we talk about  being an idiot but it's a process more  than it's a product  you act like an idiot now because you  have been living like an idiot  for the past five years  and just to bring nina and iran into  this make clear why i'm making this  parallel isn't here  you guys may not know this but nina and  miranda have been in their own struggle  to lead a more meaningful life they  signed up to go back to university  they're identical twins  one of them was clear that what she  wanted to do was psychology the other  one wasn't clear what her major was  going to be at all they made a whole  bunch of videos  saying okay they decided they're  motivated they're going back to  university they're going to hit the  books by the way they dropped that at  university in the past both of them  and you know  mysteriously all those youtube videos  have disappeared if there's still one or  two of them up i apologize but to my  knowledge they went back and deleted or  do listed those youtube videos we've  never had an explanation for why  university just didn't happen  and in terms of timeline that wasn't um  related to current  mask wearing concerns we'll put it this  way to be as vague as possible um  there's before um before these uh these  measures uh happened that did close down  some universities so i'm sure it's not  for that reason probably they tried i  found it was all a lot harder than they  were expecting to be and they got  sheer sheer speculation on on my part  and you know we know for a fact that  nina and miranda have heard my critique  of them they've responded to it at  different times i've also had  interaction with their father so nina  and randa know about my youtube videos  about them i can't say they've seen  every single one but they've seen enough  they've seen several and their father  knows about it he's probably watched  every single one just knowing his  character and he's interacting me we've  had email back and forth you know over  the years her father their father is  also a very dark character well so  here's another kind of breaking point in  your life right  what did they do with their time for the  five years  leading up to their attempt to go back  to university and hit the books  to my knowledge  they worked as fitness instructors  um  you know they did these  sexually provocative videos on youtube  my normal example is the lick my body  challenge uh the twin yoga challenge the  twister challenge you know they did that  was their period of popularity and  success their youtube channel now is a  you know  it's a ghost town and it's it's a  failure now but you know in the past  when they were successful it was doing  these sexually provocative videos very  often in collaborations on other  people's channels they spent their time  singing songs and doing dances and doing  fitness instruction and talking about  the the food they eat and talking about  a curious they live these really  brainless  child-like  lives  and right now they are about  29 years old if they're still 28 so i  don't know their exact birthday  28-29 and they're looking ahead  to turning 30.  and i get it they tried to go back to  university  and they can't go back  they're not intellectually prepared  they're not i would say emotionally  prepared i think they're not even  ethically prepared  there are ethical components you know to  life in mind well again it's not just  that they are  idiots  you know it's not just that they are  stupid they're acting like idiots  because that's all they've been  practicing  i mean for five years you've been living  like an idiot you've been choosing to  live this way and now here are the  consequences and the probably  consequences nobody  ever talks through with you nobody ever  said to you look if you keep living in a  childish way this way  one day you're going to wake up and  you're 29 years old  and you realize not just that you are an  idiot you don't know how to be anything  else  you know  um  oh anyway they have things in common  uh sorry there's another example i want  to bring in here if you guys don't know  who matt dillahunty is um i've made  several videos criticizing matt delaney  matt dillahunty he is considered an  intellectual so the irony is is very  different  um from my perspective he's an imbecile  but people people do not admire matt  dillahunty because of his body uh nor  because of his singing ability both  aaron janus and nina miranda come out of  a musical background this may also be an  issue maybe part of their downward  spirals as big part of what led them up  to this point in their lives and by the  way these are these women are all about  the same age so aaron ballpark same same  age as nina sorry sorry if i'm off  some of that um but she'll also be  looking forward towards 30 uh soon  enough so sorry if she's actually 27 i  apologize not not not far off in age and  all prominent leaders in the vegan  movement well  i'll tell you something very interesting  about matt dillahunty it's always just  been astounding to me  how ignorant he is how clueless he is  how  uh immature he is i you know  [Music]  why would you be surprised by someone  being stupid well in his case he's been  a major leader in the atheist movement  for like 15 years so you know like even  if even if you started off being an  idiot it's kind of like well yeah but  you've had years and years to work on  this you've had years and years in the  spotlight with a lot of kind of  encouragement and you know you've had  every opportunity to develop yourself  intellectually even if it's just over  the last 15 years and not over the whole  50 odd years of his of his life  you know what it is  video games  matt dillahunty was a ranking  league player of competitive video games  already in the 1990s  he has been a lifelong  video game at it and still as an old man  now he live streams himself playing  video games for many hours and for him  it's especially the so-called  first-person shooter  where you're walking around and shooting  people in the head again and again again  this is somebody's put all these hours  into video games it's a lot so sorry you  know  [Music]  when you think about it in terms of time  i can't say everybody has the time  necessary i can't say everybody has the  talent necessary most of us do  the vast majority of us whether you're  looking at the video game habit in your  life or the dog you're taking for a walk  and picking up the poo after you know  most of us really do have room in our  schedule we could make  for the life of mind and i'm going to go  on to talk about some commitments in the  life of mine  are incredibly time consuming learning a  foreign language especially a really  alien language like uh  korea ojibwe chinese japanese  thai laosh and cambodian  a  huge number of hours can just go into  learning one  uh foreign language that can take all  the time you've got but by the same  token having just one girlfriend can  take all the time and energy you've got  and some of you have two girlfriends and  three girlfriends you know what i mean  uh like you know there are other things  that are going to  come into that  i'd remind you guys some of you will  remember that some of you won't  um it was a an unintentionally hilarious  video attacking me  um  so this is an obscure youtuber and i  somehow found the video and i think i  used a clip of it in a video of my own  channel this is a couple months ago  and this is a british guy who's got the  british accent and he was attacking me  because he felt  my criticism of video games was  unreasonable  and  the main thing he was pointing out was  that i had music  from video games in my video  saying that you shouldn't  play videos therefore my argument it was  an incredibly stupid argument but i'm  sorry i don't know how much of this was  in the the video as i edited it or i  forget if i shared the link on patreon  or what  but you know the main thing this guy  attacked me for i wouldn't be surprised  if when he's off camera he's  anti-semitic because it really sounded  like the standard anti-semitic  conspiracy theory thing  um he was attacking me for being born  rich  and claiming that the only reason i was  so learned the only reason i had a  university degree yeah it's some  university degree i've got let me tell  you  sorry i don't know what he probably  imagines i have some kind of university  education i don't have  um i have a bachelor's degree from the  university of toronto people you know  the only reason i'm so erudite and the  only reason i've studied these languages  and i know all this ancient history is  because my parents are rich and have  connections and that they pulled strings  to make this possible now again sorry  just his phrasing of it it did sound  like he's been reading some anti-semitic  stuff on reddit it sounded like the  standard kind of  jewish conspiracy you know a view of the  world  now there are a lot of things wrong with  it and some of them are really worth  unpacking even just in this limited  context by the way okay  some other people in the vegan community  some other vegan youtubers have attacked  me in those terms sometimes it was  explicitly anti-semitic and sometimes  implicitly but yes many other vegans um  to name one one who was really messed up  about it you know uh joe vegan he was  also british there's a connection there  i remember he he i think felt very  inferior because of his low level of  educational attainment  and um he really i remember it in emails  from him um  don't yeah i guess we talked about it  verbally too over like skype  you know um  i remember him really really in this  strange vitriolic passionate way saying  like the only reason you've learned  chinese is because your parents are rich  like they bought that for you the way  your parents buy you a car or something  the only reason you're smarter than me  is because you're you're rich  you know  rich men  need to understand how poor men  work  and  poor men need to understand how  rich men work you know the two sides  need to understand each other  [Music]  some people live their lives where  they've never really had any rich  friends they've never really had any  rich enemies either it's they dehumanize  the rich and they think they live on the  other side of this of this wall of this  gated community  if you'd known  any number of rich people  you know  do you have any idea how ignorant how  poorly educated  how  fatuous 99 of rich people are i mean if  you would physically go inside the ivy  gardens of cambridge of oxford or  harvard university you name it of the  most elite universities even there  that's not all the rich people plenty of  rich people don't choose to go to those  places but like you can be in the most  elite settings with the most privileged  people  and  you know  they  they look up to kim kardashian like that  you know kim kardashian is born ranch  you know there are like the relationship  between being rich and the life of the  mind just if you knew more  rich people you wouldn't think this way  now i had one friend who was uh not  jewish he had no jewish background in  his family  but i remember he he dealt with plenty  of anti-semitic people and his favorite  method of ridiculing the anti-semitic  people who very often believed that  everyone with jewish ancestry is a  genius is like you know if you took one  beach vacation in tel aviv  if you would just go to a nightclub in  tel aviv israel and get to if you just  knew more jewish people your illusion  that they're all geniuses that they're  all part of this computer like you know  this can this can this can be challenged  just on that empirical basis like if you  knew more rich people you might question  the advantages and disadvantages of  being born rich yeah well you know the  actual work that's involved even even  with the example of learning chinese so  it's a great example but in some ways  it's a unique and misleading example no  being wealthy you have no advantage in  learning chinese and spend some time  around those people you can meet a lot  of pampered rich kids and that's exactly  what they can't do you know they might  have a millionaire father who says hey  look you know you've kind of been a lazy  wasted spacer in here i want you to go  and learn chinese you can contribute to  the family business in the future  um that's a lot like nina and randa  trying to go back to university that's a  lot like aaron janus suddenly trying to  be a politically well-informed  substantive intellectual you will find  that they're often kind of worse  prepared that all they know how to do is  be is be childish  they can't meet the challenge in it and  it falls apart  um  this is this is one part of that but the  other part i i  uh i hinted before that i was going to  talk about this you know being an  intellectual  how many hours do you need in the day  maybe if you just didn't have a dog  maybe the time you were spending walking  a dog and grooming a dog and cleaning up  dog hair and dog vomit  there you go you know  that counts that can really be enough to  develop money so the amount of time you  need if you really think about how much  time do you need  if you've got the will right  um  well how much money do you need there is  an author whom i grew up referring to as  only david thoreau  but apparently only the quebecois call  him that uh in his own life apparently  his name he was called thorough we have  names american names thorough and  thoroughgood and thorough thorough this  and throw that so um his actual name  when he was alive was not parole  but uh only david brings out the french  the brings of the bad french accent in  me to remind you all this is called a  balacial i do have a separate channel  with a spanish name though you know i  have derebar el tiello there is already  a spanish spin-off for this channel  i'm i'm at level zero on spanish group i  can't conjugate the verb to be or to  have  aesthetically it's a very appealing  language spanish at least on paper  anyway so  how much money does it take to learn  spanish  do you think this stuff is the privilege  of the rich you know so uh only david  toro i remember him lamenting  that to buy a serious book in his time  was like six months worth of wages for a  label now in the context of him saying  this he meant something like thucydides  he meant uh  hardcover  books from ancient greece and rome this  is the kind of serious book he was  talking about  but um  obviously it was reflecting on the the  actual  wages earned by a farm laborer or  something and the part of america was we  was living he said well obviously the  vast majority of people can't become  learned men  just because of the cost of books i  remember i was stunned to read that  where i was in toronto at this time this  was very much pre-internet  the internet was coming into existence  step by step but there i had no ability  to read a book at that time  on a computer get a book for free and  read it  but on the one hand of course there were  libraries but toronto at that time was  sort of this great center of bargain bin  secondhand books and even just  mass-produced new books that were really  really cheap you know 1.99  for a new book and when you went to i  mean i'd go to these sales where it was  the library getting rid of the books  they didn't want anymore and there were  sec i've taken a list of these i went to  those second hand bookstores you know  that i took you to but at that time  probably it's probably because it's  before the internet now on the internet  those books i think are sold more  efficiently over different websites uh  including amazon you know so sold uh  before the internet all they could do  was kind of dump all these books  together and and put them in front of  you  and uh yeah i mean almost everything was  just unconscionably cheap i mean how  could paper be so cheap and this made me  keenly aware before i'd read that from  henry david thoreau that his reflection  on how scarce books were in his own life  and i always looked around thinking like  you know do you people realize movies  were expensive than going to see a movie  in a theater you know for the cost of  two people  going to see a movie like  you could have a whole library of books  from the amount of money you spent on  one night's entertainment going out to  the movies  movies were a huge waste of a huge waste  of money at that time i don't know if  that's gotten better or worse the cost  of actually going to a movie theater  seeing a movie in that in that format so  you know it was just laziness it was  just self-indulgence you know money  did not come into it i mean today  even if you don't own a computer  you can download all the greatest works  in the history of mankind onto your cell  phone you could  uh some of them you can buy for 99 cents  you can't if you want to do it but well  you know project gutenberg the  availability of a free e-text and you  know in many of the fields of study i've  been in  whether it is cree ojibwe chinese  japanese  chinese japanese uh cambodian you know  pali you name it  all of the best resources were free  because all of the best research was  done already 100 years ago just being  real with you like most of the books i  really valued they were not the new  expensive books they were books from at  least 50 years ago uh some 100 years ago  oh well yeah so there's a  well this yeah this is from this is from  the communist period it's a memorable  little book yeah yeah but  well babe i mean i think you can imagine  like with a country like laos  um the french colonial period is what  produced these big gorgeous impressive  books and that stuff it would either be  public domain it would be free or almost  free and also frankly india sri lanka it  was basically british empire books  anyway i am i am digressing  but you know um  the allegation  that the life of the mind that  developing yourself intellectually that  this is  an elite  pastime in the 21st century  nothing could be further from the truth  i've known a lot of rich people they  grow up lonely  they grow up  you know frankly  more susceptible to and more damaged by  drug addiction and alcohol  than the poor  you know  most rich people grow up very neglected  by their own parents they grow up being  raised by filipina nannies or other you  know household servants those are the  people who cook for them and and care  for them to a limited extent and they  grow up going to schools where everyone  else is also a rich kid  with you know flagrant amounts of  illegal drug use and drinking and and  recklessness and so on um  it is it is very very rare to meet a  wealthy person who has cultivated their  mind he lives a life than mine in any  sense  and  you know beyond that  and again these people are hard to meet  if you go out and meet people who really  have lived life of the mind and who have  as i said earlier they've kind of lived  with their own politics lived with their  own culture the politics have won the  culture of one  if you can ask them politely to what  extent was lack of money and obstacle to  you  i'm i'm being real with you i think most  of the time most numbers say no not at  all no this this stuff it didn't really  cost me anything  um and you know i just say you know i  have been an intellectual when flat  broke i have literally been an  intellectual when i woke up in the  morning and chopped firewood  and there was no electricity you know  you boiled water so you could drink it  over over firewood i've i have been  intellectual and conditions of extreme  poverty with no  sorry i think i already mentioned no  electricity it's kind of a big deal  and i read with a flashlight  zipping up the mosquito netting  you know i have been an actual an  intellectual in very very hard  conditions and i've been in a lot in  intellectual condition where i was poor  enough that i really didn't know i was  gonna pay my rent you know two or three  months down the road where my life was  really an immediate economic struggle  that way i have been an intellectual  when i had a newborn baby in my arms and  i was  it was  a certain stage it was good exercise it  was  uh uh cradling her and getting her to  sleep you guys might think i mean it's  normally shown on tv is this right no  it's a big motion  babies really like to be swung a good  long a good long way in your arms but  you know  i have been an intellectual while  caring for a newborn infant you know  i've been an intellectual in all kinds  of different circumstances not just the  one you see you know right now on your  screen and i mean you know  so i guess i did i'm just being honest  with  you  i guess i did buy the cheapest spanish  dictionary i possibly could  how much better is the dictionary that  cost twice as much like you know really  i mean from my obvious it's from my  limited perspective as someone learning  at levels you know we're not talking  about doing advanced research on spanish  etymology or something i know there are  some other oops  there are some other resources you might  need if there are some other research  purposes you've got but you know um  you know i know just being with you i  know what it's like to be an  intellectual when you literally don't  own a desk you don't own a table it's  hard  that's there's still one article of mine  on the internet that has typos and it's  because i didn't have a table you know  like i  kind of went right i had i typed it i  was lying on the floor i just mentioned  so there were some weird typos in that  that wouldn't i'm not saying i make no  typos by the way but having a having a  desk having a table uh that circumstance  would help you know but once you have a  desk once you have a table  what difference does it make if you have  a table  of plywood  a table of oak or a table of solid gold  um whatever it is you want to learn  whether it's a language politics history  you know you you can buy a pen  for a dollar ninety-nine you buy a pen  and probably get one now for 25 cents  you buy it you can buy the cheapest pen  in the world  you can buy a solid gold fountain pen  you can buy a platinum foundation is it  going to help is it going to make you  any smarter it's going to help you learn  chinese to buy a really fancy pet again  sorry economics whatever whatever you're  trying to learn  having a solid gold desk having a solid  gold pen is that really gonna help you  out  now look it's not the topic of this  video oh good some people are shocked  that i'm learning spanish  be shocked  cope with it  um  talking about money sorry  it's not the topic of this video and i  am happy to respond to your your  comments as i just did  uh but this  whole subject unfolds in the shadow of  the failure of organized education and  it has taken me a long time to accept  just how broken  just how bad university education is i  just talked about this with my mom the  other day and it's one of those things  most people they they say it but they  don't really live with the implications  they don't really  live according to that conclusion  they've come to after so many years of  bad experience they usually say oh yeah  the universities are all bad it's all  [ __ ] don't waste your time and then  they turn around and tell you to sign up  for a course so they say oh you know you  should go to the university or i can  help you  i say no no wait you just said a minute  you have to really live with the  implications of how of how of how bad it  is how failed it is  um  if you believed there was a university  anywhere in the world that could help  you learn chinese  and tuition cost a million dollars  your perspective on life would be very  different from mine because i know  as a matter of fact  there is not any university anywhere in  the world that will help you learn  chinese for any price  not for a million dollars and not for  five thousand dollars not at the  cheapest there is no help and i i say  this under other headings there is no  professional help now i can't say this  about every field of clean endeavor  because i don't know every field  but  you know many people told me  before i went to college to study baking  how to bake bread  in case you guys think i'm using baking  in some abstract philosophical sense no  i mean taking dough and water and yeast  and making bread that's what i paid to  study it was a really expensive college  too  wasn't the cheapest college building so  many people i talked to in the field  said don't do it just teach yourself  how to bake bread it's going to be a  rip-off it's going to be a it's going to  be terrible  and i couldn't believe them i have  experience with so many fields  philosophy politics anthropology history  there's so many fields where i could say  something similar  you know  um  well you know i couldn't bring myself to  believe it about bread this is  bacon bread come on well guess what they  were they were right you know but this  idea  um that it takes time you don't have is  false this idea that it takes money you  don't have is false and then linked to  that idea about money is the idea that  it requires an institution  that you don't have access to either  because you don't have time or because  you don't have money or you believe in  some conspiracy theory there's a  conspiracy keeping you out of that  keeping out of that institution so you  know guys i mean  look this is brief we'll come back to  the video i taught myself  how to read and write pali a language  very similar to sanskrit  with a flashlight under a mosquito net  in a third world country while working  part-time jobs like i had other jobs to  pay the rent right nobody helped me no  teacher no buddhist monks helped me no  professor helped me no i rode my bicycle  to the [ __ ] library and i did the  work  nobody you know  and my access to the internet was very  limited too because i was in a third  world country at that time and at that  time actually so i just say this is  mostly paper and pen and flashlight and  then i start meeting these people with  phds and they all know less than i do  and i say to them and i'm not i'm not  mousy in some cases i said it this  directly straight to their face i can't  believe you squandered this opportunity  you had the library i never had you had  the wooden desk i never had you had the  desk lamp i never had you had all the  conditions to support you  in this kind of scholarship for years  i never read any of that and you are a  bumpkin ignorant piece of [ __ ] compared  to me compared to what i mentioned to  you again i had to work jobs and i had  jobs i did i was busy  i had jobs and i and i had a girlfriend  oh  there's the big there's the big regret a  lot of my time when the girlfriend i had  during those years it was awful a lot of  my time and energy was heartbreaking and  terrible i would have been better off  alone or whatever would have been  i would have been better off doing  almost anything else in that department  but i had a horrible girlfriend that  took a lot out of me um  you know look i've had that conversation  with people face to face and i've had it  by email and someone was like well look  i've been spending less time wishing i  could have that desk and that desk lamp  and that library card and that  institutional support and that  institutional education and here you are  you squandered it it's one thing for me  to say  oh there's no advantage to being in a  phd program there's no advantage to  being an mma program there's no  advantage to having access to uh an  academic library an academic supervisor  or a professor or that kind of structure  it's one thing to see that it's another  thing to really live it to really  internalize it and really accept it  and once you do that's why you start  looking at aaron janus as your equal  that's why you start looking at nina  randa as your equal that's why you start  looking at ali hardest the as your equal  james aspie any of these people and  think hey  you could do all the same things i do  the grass isn't green on the other side  there isn't any institution that can  help you there isn't any amount of money  that can help you and you don't really  need any more time than you've already  got you know the the free time you've  already got what a stellar ray  i i look at these people as my equals  who are squandering in a sense the same  opportunity i had or or an even better  opportunity than i had you know and i  you know i mean this like you know again  i looked around at all these people in  in buddhist studies this is just one  example i could now give a whole series  of examples but a whole bunch of  different fields like including like  anthropology you know  and you know with it  look any intelligent hard-working person  working completely on their own in the  21st century can learn more in two years  than you would learn doing a phd program  and when you put the phd and ma together  you're lucky if that's six years i mean  the real number of years people spend  getting a ph.d anime it's often eight  years and 10 years you know the real  number of years of their life it takes  up  there's a lot of jiggery pokery and how  the years are calculated but yeah and  you can meet people who took 15 and 20  years getting their phd but if you add  together the years for an and phd and  there's a sense in which we all know why  the problem isn't knowing it the problem  is accepting it the problem is  internalizing it the problem is really  living with the consequences and this  leads to  a kind of radical egalitarianism  paradoxically  combined with what i'd call  voluntaristilitism  she's got a burp  what a strange phrase voluntaristicism  okay you know if you have a democratic  forum this is easiest to visualize at  the level of a city or a small town say  okay we're gonna have we're gonna have  some more direct democracy  we're gonna have people show up  and debate what we should do about  things like parking regulations and suit  all the boring things government does  we're gonna have some more direct  democracy oh yeah and it's egalitarian  in theory  anyone can participate but not everyone  does  and let's just say there isn't even a  formal exam you have to write  but if you show up at these events to  talk about sewage treatment and you  haven't done the reading and you haven't  done the research you don't know what  the technical terms mean you haven't  been over the blueprints you haven't  invested that level of work you will be  shamed and humiliated and ridiculed for  sure let's let's just say that you could  imagine a democratic system where you  actually have to study and write an exam  to show yeah look i know enough about  sewage treatment to participants but  let's just say it's just shame and  ridicule that you came to the connex you  came to city hall to participate all  right  my point is this you could have elitist  systems that don't exclude people  oh yeah  anyone can participate but not everyone  will it's voluntary it's voluntarist in  just this limited sense volunteerism  word that's had many meanings in many  different periods of time  the the will is a word that's had many  different meanings  periods of time too okay so um  that's the paradox paradoxical sense in  which what i'm saying here is both more  egalitarian and more  overtly elitist now sir you guys will  know look you know i got love for all  these people but i also have contempt  for them there was an anarchist who  followed this channel so closely for  more than five years but let's say five  years i might be more like seven or  eight years there was this guy and he  was an ideological anarchist and i was  very kind and encouraging to him  despite the fact he's a jackass i can't  guess you know well  here's the thing you know i was i was  kind of encouraging him for the whole  five years the whole eight years  whatever was  you know  whatever my opinion of him was at the  beginning of that period of time you  know  five years is enough for somebody to  learn a lot  and on any one of these issues that he  was you know speechifying on the  internet that he was speechifying to me  about by the way too you know he this  guy cared a lot about the syrian civil  war  was very much ongoing in those years  it's not really over yet but still that  was when the the red hot bullets fly uh  in the syrian civil war you know so he  has all these stronghold opinions it's  like look bro  i'm looking at you over five years and  you're not getting any less ignorant  you're not getting any better informed  you're not getting any more  sophisticated something's really wrong  here now again i think uh matt  dillahunty is a great example of that  whether you're talking about five years  or like 15 years in this case  what's what's how is it possible this  guy's a public intelligence looking  forward and you're not  i'm not seeing growth and not seeing  development you should be having  breakthroughs all the time you should be  able to say wow you know i i view this  chapter of history  profoundly differently fundamentally  differently than i did just two years  ago now that i've done this reading or  this research or now that i've compared  it to this you know now i see and feel  about this in a totally different way i  did the life of the mind you're  challenging your own ignorance more  often they're challenging other people's  on youtube you mostly see people you  mostly see me challenging other people's  ignorance well i do challenge my own you  know i'm in that sense i'm turning a  corner on issues uh all the time  um  [Laughter]  is there a separate conclusion to this  thesis  um you know  uh  my point is this you know  at some point  both for ourselves and others like on a  one-to-one basis ourselves and people we  know is individuals and when you scale  it up and you start talking about a  community as a whole  you start talking about a culture or  society as a whole you start talking  about millions of people in aggregate  at some point you have to stop blaming  lack of time at some point you have to  stop blaming lack of money at some time  at some point you have to stop blaming  the institutions whether it's a lack of  institutions or low-quality institutions  at some point you have to say no  it's on you  and and this great question because it's  on me too it's all up to me right it's  all up to you as an individual and in  recognizing that there aren't any  insuperable barriers or obstacles for me  as an individual or for matt delante's  individual or for uh this anarchist guy  i'm leaving a name as individual or for  richard vegan gaines or for nina and  randa or for everything in in  recognizing that right in denuding the  situation of these uh familiar excuses  that oh you couldn't learn that without  going to university you couldn't learn  that with some special advantages in  life you weren't you weren't born with  uh and so on and so forth you know  you're then left with this stark  realization that the intellectual elite  we're talking about is voluntary you  know  nobody chose them they chose themselves  nobody appointed them they are  self-appointed and nobody this  generation nobody trained them nobody  educated them either they educated  themselves or they just plain remain  podunk ignorant  now look i gotta say i've known a lot of  people inside phd programs  and there are people who've told me they  learned more from me than they learned  from their phd  supervisor you know i and that's  it's not a great boast you can look at  most people their relationships their  phd supports they learn they learn very  little i mean think about you could come  to my youtube channel you could watch  hundreds of hours of lectures from me  how many hundreds of hours did you did  you actually talk to or listen to your  your phd supervisor it's not it's not  that that great of both seen in that  context  but obviously you know i was married to  someone with a phd my first wife  my my ex-wife  i know she learned more from me than she  learned from her phd supervisor i mean i  i know whether or not she'd say that now  or whether or not she said it in the  past or whatever i went through that  process with her and i think you can  imagine like  it's a reasonable comparison what is the  value of being married to someone and  being in love with someone who's an  intellectual and who lives in the same  apartment with you and who talks to you  every day about what you're reading and  your research and the article you're  writing in your next research proposal  now by the way i did not um  i did not teach her chinese my ex-wife i  did not teach her  cambodian or paulie i did not teach you  any language there's nothing really  tangible the simple of that but those  discussions every day  some of them are in your apartment some  of them are while you're at the library  some of them are in reading and giving  feedback on the chapters of her phd  thesis or whatever like in a sense  if i didn't contribute more to her  intellectual development you know then  her phd i'd be a terrible person like  what you know what's wrong with you of  course it should be on  again these things are kind of easy to  say  um  if they're really hard to live with it's  hard to take seriously  um and live with the implications of uh  these these kind of all too obvious  observations about how little education  matters how little time and money  matters  and then you know what so look this  comes back to you so i know it seems  like a long time ago now i read you that  quote from  seneca seneca is saying all we have is  time  and you know the greatest way is to look  back on your life and realize  that you're already more dead than alive  your life is more than halfway over and  more than half of your time it's either  time you've squandered yourself or it's  time as he said so other people have  filtered from you other people have  robbed you of other people  so all feelings i can relate to i say i  was probably influenced by that when i  was 11 years old or something figure out  when i read seneca exactly probably did  shape the way i viewed a lot of other  things this life went on where i got  this mentality that time  really matters  um  but you know once you accept that once  you accept that it's on you  what attitude should you take toward  james aspie what attitude should you  take towards nina and miranda what  attitude should you take toward aaron  janus the tragedy of the situation at  least with aaron  nina miranda is that you know  some  part of them  wants this  some part of them  wants to be an adult who is taken  seriously precisely on these political  issues and we could even say precisely  on the type of political issues my  youtube channel  tended to be obsessed over over the last  eight years you know like this is  exactly what they want i i've seen aaron  janis standing up and giving a lecture  uh you know at a vegan conference i'm  sure  i've seen it on video nina and randa  know what it's like to stand in front of  a podium  and mostly they do this joking girly  thing of pretending don't take me  seriously and i i do think many men live  the same way i do it's not a strictly  gender-coded problem it's not just a  problem women have it's not just a  problem good googling people a lot of  men will get up at the podium and try to  joke around and say hey don't take me  too seriously  um kind of boyish you know joking  behavior  but in these cases you know they  whatever you spend 29 years  living like an idiot and then you hit  some kind of breaking point or in some  kind of context you realize what you  really want us to be is to be taken  seriously to have exactly this kind of  this kind of  capacity acumen intellectual substance  you know uh so on so forth okay so i'm  gonna read to you guys if you uh if you  saw this on  instagram before you got here or you  read one part of it in the uh  in the description of this video you  already know where i'm going i got a uh  i got a letter from a viewer of the  channel and by the way i assumed this  was an older gentleman i see there's  someone at least 50 years old when i got  the the message it's not not worth  saying why  um but he wrote back later and specified  that no he's he's about 19 years old  he's actually quite a young man  melissa do you want do you want to jump  in is it just a good break point where  i'm not ready yeah okay no but is there  anything you want to say about  any issue  you're unlikely to have another  opportunity to speak  okay  something that i was thinking when you  were  speaking  was that when i was in university i was  shocked when i went from  studying science classes uh i was  enrolled in science courses and then i  switched to  being an english major and i was  spending hundreds of dollars on my  textbooks when i was taking science  classes and in this sense i understand  why the  idea comes to mind that  education is expensive by default  because when you take these courses it's  really 250 dollars for a textbook uh in  chemistry or psychology for example  and then when i started reading english  literature  the majority of the books were two  dollars online you know so i would order  all of my textbooks and uh for under one  hundred dollars jane eyre  199. yeah well by virginia woolf class  all of those books were a dollar each or  something you know so i  look i know you don't you don't learn  the same material but in learning  languages um you know i had to i had you  hold up that that chinese for beginners  50 cents  the like  three editions ago version of the  textbook that they're teaching chinese  right now at university of victoria yeah  that was  like 40 dollars for for an old edition  you know  it it isn't necessarily about getting  the best and not not it's not about um  getting the most recent or like the  state of the art i just want clever  saying  melissa he is here talking about the  perception  that learning costs money the perception  that the life the minds cost mike that's  very different from the actual cost it's  just  just a footnote but i mean what she's  saying is true this is why people  perceive it as expensive perhaps perhaps  some people it's seeing but  the only thing that is though i do think  it's mostly the excuse-making mentality  and  an imperfect parallel but a real one  some of you may know fat people and they  say oh well if i were rich like you i'd  be thin if i could afford to exercise  yeah  yeah you know just to be fair some  sports do require a lot of money if you  a sailboat sailing costs money you know  i i think fencing sword fighting costs  my life i think some sports aren't but  if you're talking about diet and  exercise and weight loss i mean i think  we all know that is really an excuse  making magnets but a lot of fat people  do that a lot of people blame and hate  others and say well you're thin and i'm  fat because of poverty worse as well i i  think that's the most fun i don't think  muslims mentioned with the perception  that this is uh this is expensive i'm  sure but i really did like that you know  i really do appreciate the conversation  about  the cost of time in your life yes and  ultimately it costs nothing to ask a  question it costs nothing to look for  answers from people that you know  uh  however  um  there's something in the  value of being able to  decipher what is  a useful  textbook or a useful uh  website  being able to to determine whether this  is a good use of your time  that  it kind of has to come  from going through the process maybe of  you know questioning examining is  questioning your own life and it's  really you know this idea of the life of  the mind includes questioning and  examining what you're doing with your  time i really think that's a fundamental  thing so i i agree with that i just i  just don't think  money helps i don't think university  helps i mean i think what you're saying  is true but sadly you you can meet  people who've had elite  again cambridge oxford et cetera who  never got that you can meet people who  never had any formal  education who get it that the the term i  like to use is doubt i talk a lot about  doubt in a positive way being able to  doubt things and question things but you  can have all of your textbooks handed to  you by a professor at a university or  you can be you know you could be someone  who never wants university but who also  just uncritically receives  books the reason it doesn't really  question sir if you guys didn't see i  said on instagram recently um  you know books are written by  complicated people with complicated  motivations there's no such thing as a  simple book about the history of world  war ii oh i just want a simple  introduction in the history world  there's no such thing as a simple book  on ecology i think ecology is a great  example just like can you get anything  about ecology that isn't propaganda you  know that isn't pushing  several different agendas in the same  book frankly you know what i mean i as a  vegan you guys will some of you will  relate to that whether or not you're  vegan someone or that you know but you  know books are written by complicated  people with complicated motivations the  authors themselves may not know those  motivations but you as a person buying  and reading the book you may be even  more to see but yeah that kind of doubt  um  that i i'm just popping in to say that's  not something you can buy it's  definitely not something you receive  from organized education yeah  sure yeah i i  have a couple things to say there in  response but i've now asked several  different people who majored in  environmental science  type degrees for recommendations for  introductions to ecology and none of  them want to recommend anything to me  because they all were able to see that  what they were required to read for  their courses was just crap  same thing even with nutrition  nutritional science yeah just this  example yeah oh yeah well just given  that we  have been able to think these things  through over time um  so the other thing i wanted to say is  that  the conversations that i heard on the  news um maybe it was it was more  progressive news that i was listening to  maybe five or six years ago  well it was about the value of education  and you know bernie sanders was all  about making education less expensive  because everybody deserves to have a  bachelor's degree everybody deserves to  have this opportunity  um and  there was the concept that i grew up  with was you know you can't  or you you ought not to  um  critique people for being uneducated  because you don't know their  circumstances perhaps they grew up poor  and and  this is really  getting to the opposite conclusions that  you don't need to be wealthy in order to  to build up this ability to have doubt  you know to examine  your life life around you um  one book that costs 20 could be  invaluable to you um  one book that cost two dollars  yeah sure or one one book you download  for free on the internet but yeah but  i'm just thinking of uh  in particular uh anatomy of an epidemic  this book that's discussing psychiatric  uh medications you know oh you mentioned  that book i quoted you guys from uh  seneca uh so an hour ago  less than one dollar  however i don't like the translation i  might pay more for a better translation  but that one is less than one dollar  yeah but you know this that anatomy of  an epidemic book talks about people who  grow up in poverty people who grow up in  foster going in and out of foster homes  they are poor you know they are so poor  but they still are prescribed these  psychiatric medications  they know something's wrong but they  just don't understand it you know so  just one book like this can really  change your perspective your perception  of even just you know what medications  you've been taking your whole life sure  you know i it sounds stupid but it's not  what is medicine what is science you  know what is politics those are really  big foundational things  and  uh and at university you're not going to  get that  you know no no no no nobody's gonna  nobody's gonna do the thinking for you  and no one's gonna ask the questions for  you on the contrary the main thing you  learn at university  is uh conformism is uh you know to to  unquestioningly follow the dictates of  authority figures and to repeat back to  them their own opinions this is the  professor's opinion so if you repeat  that back on the exam and in your essay  if you mimic the professor's opinions  that's looking ahead i do write about  this in my forthcoming book no more  manifestos a considerable part of the  book  possibly too many pages of the book are  condemning university education  but yeah actually philosophy of  education is one of the major themes of  the book it's a long book though it  covers a lot more than than just that  uh  i said um  you know you guys may not know this book  but uh machiavelli machiavelli is famous  for the book the prince but he has  another book that's called discourses on  livy  so the title machiavelli is the author  the title is discourses on libby and i  said to melissa the title of this book  would better uh it should instead be uh  everything i know about politics that is  worth saying that i have learned during  my lifetime  you know like loosely  linked to a few odd quotations from  libby like that's that's what the book  is call it commentaries on livia's  discourse oblivious it's ridiculous um  yeah in the same way you know no more  manifestos in many ways it's  everything i have to say about politics  that's worth saying  um  [Music]  i it makes me feel like i never want to  write another book in my life or another  book of this kind children's books  creative writing  other kinds of writing other kinds of  filmmaking and things i want to do but  i'm not planning for this to be a long  series of books on politics i feel like  i feel like this is it and maybe maybe  for this decade and maybe for this  maybe for this 40 years maybe when i'm  80  [Laughter]  maybe the next book on on political  philosophy to me okay so as much uh  anticipated here's this email i received  from a viewer of the channel  he says quote greetings eisel i've been  watching your videos in which you  criticize easy methods of language  learning and encourage original research  i can agree that if i took up these  practices for five years they would  change my life for the better and  possibly equip equip me to make a  positive difference in the world  yet as a beginner in both of these  fields i feel somewhat daunted when i  hear you talk about professors that knew  less about their field of expertise than  you did when you talk about false  fluency period so i just um  mentioned something implicit here you  know  already in about the year 2000  i thought university was terrible uh in  the western world at least there was  this terrible  failure and that one shouldn't go around  encouraging people to go back to  university and you might not guess those  to me but i was very reluctant i was  very hesitant to encourage someone like  vegan gains to go back to university you  know like  you know i know how bad and  disappointing and demoralizing  discouraging uh university in canada is  and university in most of the western  world is so not someone who goes around  uncritically lauding or recommending  university education i'm very very  hesitant to do so  however i have met a few people and you  know richard might be one of them games  might be one i have met a few people who  were at such a rudimentary level of  education and sophistication we thought  wow like doing a ba  could really help you out  there was one guy who was briefly my  roommate it's not worth telling the  whole story but briefly i was you know  sleeping in the same apartment as this  guy  and i remember like saying it out loud  to myself like wow  i've never met someone before where i  would recommend they get a ba  and like i would recommend this guy get  a ba in english literature like any  subject like just for this guy to sit  down  and go through the practice of reading a  book and writing an essay about it again  and again again this guy is  so [ __ ] up  he would benefit from doing that now you  know i don't know i mean maybe i'm wrong  but i mean you look at richard you look  at what he actually did with the last  five years of his life  maybe it would have helped him  i'm skeptical because i know how bad the  universities are it's not um  put it this way the fact that you know  aspirin works doesn't mean you rep you  recommend it as a cure for all illnesses  they're all people aspirin is good for  some people under some circumstances  well  university i think helps fewer people  than aspirin especially in in our in our  in the english-speaking world uh put it  that way  but just point out you know another  another recommendation  i made to richard much more passionately  and earnestly with none of these  concerns was instead that he take his  money and fame  and go to syria  you know and go get involved with  refugee camps on the syrian border going  in some humanitarian role get involved  in the syrian civil war this was a  couple years ago  at that time syria was where the red hot  bullets fly  you know syrian civil war still not over  yet but the different phase of that of  that history  now i said this for various reasons it  has to do with who richard is as a  unique person it has to do with syria it  has to do with richard's own engagement  with islam  uh you know atheist critique of islam  and so on and so forth i can say without  any hesitation that you know  specifically for this particular man at  this particular time and again he has  wealth he has he has options not all of  you may be in a position to pack up and  go to uh go to syria you know and also  he has a bit of a tough guy complex you  it's really subtle you might not have  noticed this about richard but you know  he has a lot of problems related to  masculinity and strength and violence  well you know get out in a war zone  see how little a difference big muscles  make in a in an epoch when the only  muscle you need to kill somebody is a  working trigger finger this is you know  change your view of a whole lot of  things but sure and by the way i'm not  suggesting he would go to syria and come  back  with some deep appreciation of islam  that he'd come back being pro-islamic or  something but his view of islam would  change he would gain some kind of  nuanced sophisticated you know view of  islam now  five years is a long time  what if richard  had taken  my advice  it's over five years ago that i made my  most notorious criticism of nina and  miranda the criticism they made a video  responding to we know they saw it right  it's more than five years ago i was in  kunming i remember where i was  what if  nina and randa had taken my advice  it's about five years ago i started  criticizing aaron janus  what if  janice had taken my advice and i'm i'm  saying this is emphasized i didn't tell  these people to go back to university  james aspie  i didn't tell him to go to university or  i don't know in his case if it's go back  or go in the first place i i i've never  heard him mention that that's out of his  life if he has any universities i you  know i did not tell him do this aaron  janus need miranda they they are not  university graduates they don't have  university education um  [Music]  my point is i'm actually giving very  challenging very specific  recommendations these people for how  they can  struggle their way out of their own  indolence  you know  into the life of the mind and at this  point 2022  i'm not merely saying i don't think  that's going to be university  for everyone i'm like really saying i  don't think it's university for anyone  like i don't know if anyone is going to  benefit from from uh university because  i haven't asked so far but if you were  an hour and 30 minutes in if you have a  second hit the thumbs up button by the  way it helps more people find the video  after it's published it also helps more  people find the video and join in the  conversation while it's well it's going  on and if you guys think i'm at a level  of spanish to interact with you in spain  you must come on i've got like a couple  days of spanish under my goals  level zero people level zero spanish  i guess they were so they were so  impressed by my conjugation of the bevel  yes that's that must be what it is  two beves  yeah frida is encouraging me yeah well  think about how much spanish i can learn  in just six months  as opposed to how little chinese melissa  is gonna learn  melissa is working hard on chinese but  the progress you make in chinese is so  incremental compared to the progress you  can make with a uh with the language  like like spanish yeah  anyway so  this is the problem alec uh in the  audience says alex says quote i think  both a liberal arts degree with an  exchange year or humanitarian work in  africa or india would be good options  for vegan gains  compared to what he's been doing  there's a problem with the last clause  of your paragraph there's a problem i  mean anything's better than being a  video game addict anything's better than  being a drug addict you know  um  you know but again i hesitate to say  that like you know i think it's also uh  i think it's also easy to say  for nina and randa they would have been  better off going to university  but i i don't say that i really know i  really appreciate how bad and how  demoralizing and how heartbreaking  university can be for me and for them  too like i really i don't dehumanize  them that way and you know again they  won't have the same intellectual  pretensions or intellectual ambitions i  did when i went to university but  nevertheless you know whatever their  hopes and dreams are they can have their  hearts broken by going to university too  so i'm i'm really genuinely  uh sensitive to that and look guys i  mean look  i went to learn chinese at a university  and i can't [ __ ] teach chinese i went  to learn how to make bread  at another college and they couldn't  teach how to make bread like  this is not philosophy like you know  think about just most of chinese it's  just repetition it's mostly  memorization and encouragement i mean  it's it's really compared to a lot of  other things it's so simple you want to  do politics of cambodia  it's not so simple you know  hey hey hey hey what side was america on  in the cambodian civil war hmm i've met  professors with phds who didn't know the  answer to that question their phd and  specialization was in  cambodian politics cambodian history  that was all  they didn't know which side america was  on  this is in the 1970s you know like  hmm  uh there was oh god there was another  guy  who published a book on cambodian  buddhism and on every page of that book  there were quote-unquote howlers it's  old british slang you know what i like  to call santa claus errors you know like  errors at the level of you don't realize  santa claus wasn't a figure in the bible  you don't realize santa claus and jesus  christ are two different people  like that ignored that was published by  a major press and still this day it's  the main book on cambodian business  anyway i could i could go on and on with  this but look see again some of these  things they're easy for me to say  they're hard to live with  when i look at these other people  whether they are professors or phd  students or people who people who have  phds and did something else didn't  become a professor  i have to recognize  that they are the product of that same  institutional educational system that  i'm openly telling you gives you no  advantage compared to just taking two  years and working really hard on your  own like if i'm saying that i have to  live i have to accept that well why  would you expect this guy to know more  than you can live in a tent story why  would you expect them to know more than  you could know just by living in a tent  for two years you know like that you  said that earlier so now you gotta deal  with the implications of that yes  whether they're professors uh or  otherwise and again by the same token  then you can't turn around and say to  richard vegan gaines well richard  why don't you just go back to university  you'd be so much better off and again i  know i get it you know compared to what  he has been doing  you know i i i'm not i'm still not  willing to say that  um  i'm not willing to be glib about that i  know how really life-ruining and  heartbreaking university education can  be and we're not even dealing with the  the economics of it here  okay i will continue reading this  uh email from a viewer named jez  um  so he says yet as a beginner in both of  these fields i feel somewhat daunted  when i hear you talk about professors  that knew less about their field of  expertise than you did or when you talk  about false fluency  i was wondering if you ever made a video  that specifically discusses your  research process or the process you you  use to teach yourself languages  would it make sense to familiarize  yourself with the etymology and grammar  of your own language first or is that  irrelevant  so uh i obviously i'm going to answer  this question now but i just mentioned i  have made videos talking about the  language learning aspect in the past  but they're specific to each language so  i know i've made videos talking about  learning pali  i know i've made videos talking about  learning chinese  um  [Music]  and i have made videos talking about the  critique of a discussion of the  philosophy and practices of learning  languages so  maybe he didn't find the answer he was  looking for but that's  different videos have approached that  issue in in different ways and i think  most of the stuff about research those  are in videos that are about the meaning  of life that just think they don't have  research in the title they say hey guess  what the meaning of life is and then  research is like eight tenths of what i  talk about in the answer so that's all  i'd say i mean baby you remember this  i'm not addressing the audiences babe  melissa is here but babe i think you  you'd agree with that that there were a  lot of the videos talking about the  meaning of life and how to live a  meaningful life they get into they get  into research and what is research  um research isn't just something that  happens in a lab coat kind of thing so  that's that's where i think that that  kind of material is hidden  uh but anyway i'm not giving this as an  excuse or failing to answer the question  now but i just say it's it's been  discussed in from different angles  uh in different videos that way  um  i returned to reading the email quote  i get the impression from watching your  videos that whatever methods you use  work very well  i haven't heard many people who can talk  so eloquently practically and  meaningfully about the subjects you do  i was unable to find any videos of this  nature but i was wondering if perhaps  you had someone who was unable to locate  thanks and he gives his name uh jazz  so um  the reply i sent him i wasn't going to  reply to you guys now and i told him i  was going to do a live stream it's  possible he's in the audience now i know  what time zone is honor i'll see you  tomorrow  but i wrote back and said i'd be happy  to make a video or live stream talking  about this but the reality is that i  have a lot of experience with  failure failure is in  all caps  and people seem to miss the point that  i'm not being self-pitying when i say  that i failed and failed and failed like  failure is an important part of the  process to talk about you know  and that my current success success in  quotation marks perhaps acumen or  ability would be a better phrase is  really the result of a lot of failure i  i'm not saying that i learned from  failure only but i think it is a very  important thing to talk about and you're  never going to hear that from professors  you know and even like to be fair  even if you have a really good personal  trainer who's helping you lift weight to  the gym they're not going to talk a lot  about failure they're not going to talk  about mistakes they made or  misconceptions they had about  weightlifting or injuries like  self-inflicted injuries because of  things that's probably not how they're  going to present  you know the learning process of gaining  expertise in in bodybuilding or fitness  for you you know uh but of course most  of what we know about fitness and most  we know about nutrition and most of we  know what works in sport a lot of it  does come  from failure you fail and fail and fail  uh before um  uh before well i can't even say before  you succeed  you develop acumen you develop expertise  you develop  um you know capacity in large part  through failure but sure we're not only  going to talk about failure in this  video and i do think there have been  quite a few videos about the philosophy  of failure talking about failure and  regret and reflecting on that  not only in relation to research but  research and language learning you know  being a part of it  um so i can say uh we're talking about a  method honed by failure i suppose you  could say that's that's what i wrote in  this message  a meth honed by failure  quote i have several fans of the channel  who are starting a pardon me i have  several fans of the channel who started  watching as teenagers and are now  becoming scholarly young adults in their  20s and i wonder how much different  their lives will be just because they  won't repeat my  failures um  baby you want to jump in  i said you feel like it again there's  another reason  i think i need to read again just the  question part  yeah you want me to read you  go read it from the top  okay look at your voice for change  i've been watching your videos in which  you criticize easy methods of language  learning and encourage original research  i can agree that if i took up these  practices for five years they would  change my life for the better and  possibly equip me to make a positive  difference in the world  yet as beginner in both of these fields  i feel somewhat daunted when i hear you  talk about professors that knew less  about their field of expertise than you  did or when you talk about false fluency  i was wondering if you ever made a video  that specifically discusses your  research oh so the question that's  sorry that is the question isn't it yeah  uh would would it make sense to  familiarize yourself with the etymology  and grammar of your own language okay  um  well where are you going with this  mosaic  i think it's just i mean i understand i  know the  the feeling it's daunting to know that  there aren't very many people that you  can look up to or that you can look to  for guidance  on any topic really that you have to  come come to this yourself and and i  remember in one of your videos that you  were discussing  not not having a religion but in a sense  making your own like making your own  philosophy on life not not following any  one ideology but like coming up with  your own uh sense of  you know what your philosophy is based  on what you've researched and what  you've ultimately what you've tried and  failed  again and again so i you know i just i  just want to say like i sympathize with  with his position here where he's like  in a good you know he's a beginner and  you have to  realize that  there is there are very few experts that  you can really trust  yes yeah so  do you think you can be more specific  about what's daunting  so i just know coming from a christian  background you know you want to think  that like people have answers and like  you know that's that's a very good thing  but is that is that what are you really  saying that what's daunting  is that there are no authority figures  to look up to and you expect there to be  authority figures to tell you yeah  maybe that's your answer i can even  think how i used to view uh  medical doctors how i used to view  authority figures in the government just  you know uh i can remember the  perspective that i had even in my even  when i was 21 22 23 24 where i felt very  intimidated thinking that other people  knew a lot more than me i just by  default assumed that i was ignorant i  was stupid but  as little as i know you know i don't put  i don't think of myself as that  brilliant of a person um i i'm stupid in  a lot of ways still it's still very  ignorant of a lot of a lot of topics  but still  when i am aware when i have  conversations with people where i am  more knowledgeable just about  just getting back to that topics  psychotropic medications it's just it's  hard for me to to recognize it it was  initially very difficult for me to  cope with that because i thought that  older  people were more experienced and that  older people had more knowledge than me  but i don't so then the the  responsibility like  then falls on you that you have to be  the voice like you know  trying to help people understand when  you know you didn't want to be in that  position look unfortunately it's kind of  a crappy meaningless song  but there is this song be  your own  personal  jesus  there's no one else to be jesus for you  you know  um  your situation is peculiar melissa so is  the position of nina and miranda  at some point in their lives nina and  iran have had to look at their father  and realize this guy doesn't know jack  [ __ ]  now their father presents himself as an  expert  and he is he's a kind of community  leader i mean oh sorry if you don't know  who nina miranda's father is he  literally he stands on stage he hosts  colloquia he introduces the speakers  sometimes he's the main speaker himself  you know but nina and his father they  will have seen crowds of people  applauding him you know  sometimes they did the intro music they  sang or danced and their father comes on  stage they have seen their father having  shaking hands with some of the greatest  scientists some of the most respected  scientists in the vegan community anyway  you know certain scientists and doctors  who've published books they've seen him  interviewing and being received and  treated this way and it must be a very  strange break with these fundamentally  trusting hierarchical conformist  attitudes  for nina and miranda now as they get  closer to 30 i don't know maybe they're  28 29 years old now and realize this guy  is just a crank  this guy is if you don't mind me lapsing  into german a talga nix nics  this guy just does not pull his own  weight  um  and already i'm sure for nina and  miranda as they get closer to 30 at 29  years old  they must feel that their father doesn't  know anything that they don't know  themselves  that there's really not a whole lot  there they okay  maybe he knows how to assemble a radio  you know  i'm not saying there's absolutely  nothing but you know in terms of what's  really important what what really  matters in life now  you know i know melissa's parents i'm  not going to turn this into a discourse  on melissa's parents  but i think you get the point that's a  real contrast to both how you view your  father as a child now you know your  father doesn't have any such claims  you've never seen your father standing  up on stage of being an expert now in in  my case  it's an interesting contrast to both of  those because i saw people who  celebrated my parents as great experts  and i always laughed at it i knew what  idiots they were i knew what a sham this  all was i'd seen my parents on stage i'd  seen people politely applauding i  thought honestly i've never seen a crowd  that was really thrilled by my parents  so uh okay yeah here come the experts  all right i gotta listen to this really  i'm just being honest with you i've  never they're probably at some point  they've had a crowd that was warmer but  i've never seen my parents really  received by a crowd very  very warmly and you know i'm aware i'm  very cynically aware of how little they  know and frankly they're limited  their limited reliability let's just say  you know um  now anyone else could also just read my  parents published work and come to a  pretty cynical assessment of them but  not a lot of people read books  um my parents have published many many  books i just mentioned individually and  collectively and some of their  co-authors on some they wrote  they wrote separately so i just want to  say like you know i would presume that  nina and miranda went through a  challenge now some people  they look up to religious authority and  they figure out these guys don't really  know anything i don't know or they  realize how small the gap is you know  what i mean  um  i guess i'm kind of surprised that this  i'm  not shocked but i'm surprised this is  the aspect you're drawing attention to  as being daunting  um  [Music]  so in a lot of religions  you know  you can't know anything you can't be an  expert unless you can read sanskrit  unless you can read greek unless you can  read latin unless you can read pali  unless you can read classical chinese  right  like there's some very clear demarcation  such as language ability reading ability  in a sacred language and that's what  separates the experts from the hoi ploy  that's what separates a rabbi from the  average man in judaism can you actually  read biblical hebrew most rabbis can't  biblical hebrew is not easy to read even  if you know modern hebrew by the way  it's not that easy to read and  understand biblically but in case  obviously the the bible is a heavily  studied text so you get a lot of  translations and a lot a lot of help  with faking it  uh i knew one hebrew scholar he was not  religious so i got some interesting  perspective  one biblical scholar who did hebrew  specifically  um  that was what he did his phd  oh  but you know once you realize  oh  i could learn that much latin in like  two years  you know  you and i both worked on greek most and  i both study greek briefly  what do you look greek if you're just  talking about reading greek reading  philosophical ancient greek  two years is a long time being able to  speak and converse and do original  writing in modern greek five years  that's not two years it's just the the  being able to use the modern languages  that that rapidly it's a different kind  of being able to read  ancient greek on the pitch two years  easy  shouldn't say it's easy  [Laughter]  two years of hard work okay and you can  so now what's what's the gap between me  and you what do you know  now both with  uh biopsychiatry you know  antidepressants psych meds  um antipsychotic the giving of  medications for  mood disorders shall we say trying to  cure things like depression through  through pills  you and i both know when there are  studies about kind of how many minutes  of instruction  the average medical doctor md has on  this so in in the united states and  canada md it means a normal family  doctor not a specialist not an expert  but it's more than 12 years of education  you know and you can break down like oh  this is how many paragraphs they read  about this and this is how many minutes  they were instructed about it but when  it's how to handle depression  they know depressingly little  uh now the one that vegans love to talk  about is how little  education they have  in  nutrition that nutritional science and  you may not know this there was actually  a debate  at the u.s house of congress about  making it mandatory to have nutritional  education it's like home these guys get  about 15 minutes of education on  nutrition and they really don't know  anything you know so uh  one could insert numerous anecdotes here  but i had a friend she now hasn't talked  to me in years or she's an ex-friend and  she told me this anecdote about her  getting a phone call  from a doctor so this was a full-fledged  medical doctor in france called her up  and he demanded to know how her son was  supposed to live given that there is no  protein in a vegetarian diet she was  vegan but this guy didn't know the  difference between vegan and vegetarian  like your son's going to die because he  doesn't own meat  formally university educated  so you know look  it is interesting to me that that's how  melissa responds there to say oh well  what's daunting about it you know you  must assume  these authority figures have something  you don't have whether that's confidence  or knowledge  or experiences  well and  i mean it's not the main thing we're  talking about this video but part of  being grown up is recognizing  you know no they don't  or you know if they do  is it two years of hard work is it five  years of hard work  after which you'll know everything they  know or you'll know more  than they know yeah yeah  no i agree with you that should be  if you take an optimistic view of it  then that could be empowering no no  easy to know and hard to live with i  mean i think that's one of those things  going on yeah  but in the sense it's empowering to know  that you yourself can learn more so yeah  the optimistic view to take rather  it's just  i agree with you it's just the process  of becoming an adult is realizing that  you have to  bear the responsibility yourself of  learning things and  it's it's it falls on you the  responsibility is is only on you um  [Music]  so yeah i mean i i don't need to go into  it further but you know uh  in this sense i trusted medical doctors  when i shouldn't have i should have done  the research myself myself you know i  should have trusted  kind of  that uh the skepticism that i had about  antidepressants i should have trusted  the skepticism that i had about  um  you know the medications that i took for  many years for controlling my acne you  know like this this is the kind of thing  that i i had my own experience of not  trusting realizing i shouldn't have  trusted medical doctors and other people  in my life i shouldn't have trusted you  know so i just say in this way  when you started learning chinese or  when you first considered the option of  learning because you thought about it  for several years before you committed  to do it  what was daunting about that  i'm not saying this to contradict you  but i would think  the answer has nothing to do with what  we're doing  remember but when you think about  learning chinese i don't think you  envision that in terms of oh there's  this other class of humanity  who are doctors and lawyers and judges  and experts and priests  and they have something special about  them whether innately or in terms of  education and that's why they can learn  chinese and i can't i just i'm just  suggesting you to my knowledge i mean  creating them wrong but i don't think  that was what was done  what what is daunting  you had like two years of thinking maybe  i'm underestimating it it was three  years but some of that something like  two years  and then i was saying to you look do you  want to do chinese or not you know  long story short  but you know but before you you took  seriously learning chinese that was a  couple years yeah  maybe a year and a half i don't know i  mean from the very start when i met you  you you know you uh  gave me  this is not about me the point is what  was daunting about it for you because i  know you can tell them i don't want to  get into how wonderful and encouraging i  was  sorry that's what i'm suspecting she's  getting news because it's true from the  beginning i was saying look if you want  to do this with your life here so but  but i'm saying what was daunting about  um  okay uh yeah i'll think about it but i  was just going to kind of think about  the timeline because uh you know i i  didn't actually start writing characters  until yeah or you know writing chinese  because when we was when we dropped out  of baking school whether it's no it was  prior to that yeah it was part of that  i'm just saying it doesn't matter um so  yeah i just say uh what was daunting  about it is just  i don't know i i don't know i just  trying to become an expert yourself or  even reach the level of  being a novice and anything it's just  you know it takes a certain level of um  dedication  discipline responsibility that if you  don't have it then it's it seems like an  immense obstacle but if once you start  to try and actually do it  and no it's not daunting but yeah okay  so i'm gonna give my answer i'm gonna  use your phrasing  you say  it's daunting because it's going to take  an immense amount of dedication  my answer is what's daunting and the  only thing that's daunting is that you  don't know  how much dedication it's going to take  and once you do know nothing's daunting  so like i remember saying to my ex-wife  marie i've never been less intimidated  by a language than i am in looking at  chinese  you know it's very hard language to  learn right well why  i had experience with all these other  languages i'd done all these other  research projects you know what i mean  now um i could say the same about  politics and history of central asia so  it's right now i have i've still never  done that language we have a stack of  books right here kazakhstan kurdistan  uzbekistan history and politics of this  this part of the world i'm leaving out  several but you know that that part of  the world uzbekistan and its neighbors  and their relationship to china right  the relation between china and russia  and central asia i still haven't done  any of that research i'm not intimidated  by it i'm not daunted by it at all why  well it's not because i've studied the  history and politics of cambodia or  because of studies politics allows or  because of study the history and  politics of ancient greece ancient rome  the american constitution  napoleon the french revolution it's not  any of those things but i think what's  daunting is just not knowing how much  work how much dedication how much talent  or what kind of townsville that's what i  think it is and then when you do know  that nothing's daunting  now  we all know i'm an unusual person like  what i'm saying about myself and  nothing's daunting and you can kind of  tell you can pick up on the on the vibe  you can pick up on the big dick energy  to use the gross parlance of our times  you know you can tell i'm not daunted by  this i can take on any of those things  and there are a lot of different kind of  jobs and real-life  tasks i can i i could take on it i  wouldn't be daunted by it all right but  it seems to me that that not knowing  that's really the that's really the  problem  and right but but look oh okay okay but  see enough the problem is the word  enough how much discipline so like right  now so right now melissa you're right  you're at level one two or three with  chinese moses made a lot of progress i  just i'm giving it a number because what  i'm level 3 out of 10 or something i  don't know because we haven't tried it  but you know she's made a lot of  progress in chinese in the last one year  okay  but as little chinese as you now know  like as little ability as journeys  still let's say i was given some kind of  business opportunity some kind of  career opportunity linked to russia say  oh wow i've got this amazing opportunity  but you and i are gonna have to live for  10 years  speaking russian  now  it's very easy for you to estimate and  calibrate how much work would be for you  to learn in russian and i think even you  can start to feel in your mind what  would be like just to do spoken russian  like okay i'm just going to work on  russian to be able to speak to people as  opposed to i want to be able to read the  newspaper i want to be able to write an  article published in the news like you  know there are different levels there  are different aspects to this game how  much vocabulary and how much depth how  much here like now you know i so by the  way i also have a sense of how much work  it's a lot of work russian is not easy  but my point is  it's it's finite so then you have a  sense of what is what is enough  right  now look you know um  [Music]  some of you guys will know exactly what  i'm what i'm saying here and some of you  won't i've talked about math this way  sometimes  where like well i don't know how much  would have to go into matt well but i  kind of do it's in some ways it's a good  example sometimes it's not uh you want  to master chess don't it's a waste of  time don't master chess but you know  some of these things have you done  enough math that you can think about  okay how much time and energy is that  gonna get or is that totally  intimidating to you is that totally  daunting to you because you can't really  imagine  practicing and building up the ability  in a particular type of math so the math  that's used for the stock market is very  different than the math we use in  political science social science  statistics you know or the medical  science math or you know math used um  just to dole out drugs at a pharmacy you  know measuring uh concentrations of  drugs that this molar math and so on  chem math for chemistry you know but  do you know enough  to know what this is going to demand of  you what this is what it's going to tell  you that's my thesis almost daunting now  i think what you said about authority  figures and as i said i think respect  for your own father  this is kind of classic but for some  people it'll be a buddhist monk or a  priest or something else what is the  definitive you know authority figure i  never had the illusion that my teachers  knew anything more than what was written  down on the book they were reading out  from and they didn't really know that  much about that it was very obvious to  me you know  i had a history teacher i liked well  enough but he was very open he was a he  was a beer drinking sport watching  ignoramus and he he barely knew what was  in the history textbook you know nice  guy you know i just i didn't grow up  with the illusion that my teachers were  well-informed every diet sophisticated  people i i didn't maybe  maybe my whole life would be different  if i regarded my teachers that way if  they'd been the kind of people who could  command that kind of respect for me it's  just it's a finite number of people  we're talking about here you know  probably some of them watch my youtube  channel i'm not making a claim that no  teachers are intellectuals some teachers  are intellectuals but it's rare and you  may not have had a single teacher really  was an intellectual you could you could  look up to that  you know  um  you know  so look  i understand why he's asking here i  understand how it's linked for him as a  viewer  he says  it seems daunting when he when i  mentioned that there were all these  professors who knew less than i did in  their field right okay but you're  thinking of an abstract professor you're  thinking of like a lego man sorry if you  the toy lego you get a kind of a man who  isn't a particular man he's a  generalized example of a human being and  you put a different hat on him  now he's a fireman now he's a police  officer he doesn't have distinctive  facial characteristics let alone  psychological characteristics uh he's a  mechat he's a you know  you know you're thinking of a kind of  non-specific professor each one of these  professors i'm talking about is a unique  human being with his own story and you  know i've known them on that one-to-one  basis again melissa  recently went out to lunch with me and  one of these professors and she saw how  we spoke to each other she saw how well  i knew him frankly he didn't know me  that way oh and you saw how ignorant he  was within that conversation there were  so many issues in history and politics  where he's not remotely like i might as  well be talking to a child i might as  well be talking to a  high school student you know and it's in  his field of expertise and he doesn't  know any of this stuff you know i'm  totally eclipsing him  well that guy has his own story so look  i'm not i'm not going to talk about that  one professor i'm just going to say  about many professors so like there was  one professor i had who was an alcoholic  you know basically a lifelong alcoholic  he had a phd but already that tells you  something about him you know there are  many of my professors have been  communists they live a certain kind of  life for that reason they cover their  eyes you know i knew this one professor  i mean i had dinner with her and had  lunch with her but she wasn't she didn't  teach my classes she was a professor of  tibetan she was a very fat she was a  corpulent grossly obese white woman who  had married a tibetan man and had a  tibetan dog and you know allegedly i  never heard her speaking tibetan but i  assumed they learned to speak to bed and  well enough together the two of them as  a married couple and she was this kind  of you know pathetic shut-in  um you know and i could talk to her  about politics of tibet only up to up to  a certain level these are really unique  characters with really unique  backgrounds and many of my professors  have right away admitted why they were  so ignorant i had one professor tell me  his sob story i've still got an email he  complained that he was born poor  and he had to work two part-time jobs  while he was in school and he's a chain  smoker and a heavy drinker he doesn't  identify as an alcoholic from my  perspective as an alcoholic and then he  got married and he had a kid right away  and so okay so this is your life you  smoke you drink you have a job on the  side you have a wife who knows what sex  life and you have a kid you have all  these distractions  [Music]  i don't want to give away too many  details with this guy  he he had a learning disability that  might as well say he was dyslexic  and not a little bit dyslexic he sent me  one of his manuscripts for for a book  um  when he the same way he sent it to the  publisher he said hey there's no  i don't know i don't know what kind of  editing team you're publishing woo every  sentence there were these crazy errors  in like his dyslexia was really serious  okay well that's a unique person that's  a unique story and again when i  mentioned the communism well some of  them had extreme religious views you  know they were they were fanatics for  one ideology or another just not  communism it's something else so  you know i i just say i think the way  you uh jazz the guy woman so the way you  respond to this you're kind of thinking  about a generalized lego man professor a  placeholder professor  and not these unique individuals now  some other person making this video  would say oh  and i'm sure that those professors they  were wonderful positive people in their  own way who were really good at  something and really  something there's something else they're  really good  i  homie don't play that you know no i mean  most of these professors they were  terrible people and a lot of them told  me openly about their drug habits and  their sex lives and all the ways in  which they're terrible people but i mean  the single most common vice is just  laziness  and authoritarianism that once they  become an authority figure  nobody questions them and they don't  question themselves and they stop  growing and they stop learning as soon  as they possibly can and you know i knew  professors who were colleagues of mac's  wife and i knew professors who were  you know connected to my ex-wife and her  journey as well as the ones i've i've  been connected to now at what five  different universities myself or  something and all the universities where  i went met professors when i was talking  about becoming a student there i was  proposing that i get a master's degree  and phd at different universe you know i  mean melissa you were with me at that  university in l.a right you met those  professors they're they're they're human  beings yeah i guess i would like to say  something  okay it might be that i was influenced  more by  the fact that i was trying to get into  science and that i was taking courses  where i i didn't  i had a sense that these people just  knew more than me like if i took a class  on neurobiology i remember one of my  professors he was you know he was an  expert in that field and then when i did  coursework on speech language pathology  i knew that these people you know they  had the skills that built up so in this  sense like i you know i was still in  that mode in my early 20s when i thought  that uh professors really were experts  and and so on so i i just say  yeah right but you've had way more no no  but what i'm what i'm talking about is  is calibrating that so guys yeah i've  applied for many different jobs and  looked at going into many different  lines or one of them was bricklayer  how many months do you think it takes to  master the trade of being a bricklayer  master the skill of being a bricklayer  depending on what country you live in it  may be generously estimated at three  months and some kind of just three weeks  their systems three weeks of training  and now you're a bricklayer you know now  maybe you pick up a few more tricks uh  of the trade over the years but a lot of  these things they are simple but even  something like that even uh  neurology let's just say  how many years if you work hard as an  amateur  in two years how much do you know and  one of the one of the reasons why that's  easy i know people like to exoticize the  sciences one of the reasons easy is that  there isn't a language barrier there and  there isn't the same kind of deception  that goes on in politics history  religion you know like i'm sorry but if  you want to know  [Music]  napoleon  everybody's lying about napoleon because  everyone's got an agenda even if their  agenda is just to romanticize it from  something  the closer you get to the pure sciences  in some ways the less you just have to  deal with those kinds of really  distorting bias i do know i do know  scandals it's not digressed into a bunch  of anecdotes about how bad and corrupt  the sciences are i know there are issues  but uh  yeah not as intense as religion politics  history and there isn't a language  barrier if your first language is  english  imagine if your first language is lotion  and you want to do those sciences well  first you got to learn english or or  japanese you have to learn a language  that that those scientists are really  taught and studied at but yeah i mean  but for you now i mean already  neuroscience two years whatever get the  books do the work you know  sorry i mean you know of course you  could i mean well if you disagree with  me and say it's five years fine but you  know what i mean you get the books and  start going through and see  see how much in how little there is to  learn you'll calibrate what the  challenge is how much it demands you i  mean to me i mean compared to this stuff  we've been taught compared to compared  to learning chinese  that's nothing you know the level of  expertise you know those people have in  those sciences that's really nothing i'm  sorry another example that people really  glamorize is architecture  you know and and by the way sorry i have  both professionally and in terms of my  family i know a lot of stories of anna  of  of architects  ruining building doing something wrong  that has consequences where they were  incompetent and like i realized  architecture it's an important area to  have confidence in  but there's not that much to know you  know like even the math used in  architecture you know calculating the  load that's each floor has to bear and  how the weight is driven it's not that  hard it's not that complex and we want  to really glamorize this and a lot of  those guys what however many years they  were in school during architecture  but they had two girlfriends in a  drinking habit and it's you know the  real like as opposed to working for two  years  passionately on your own you know um you  you'd be surprised how little there is  to know with any of those trades with  any of those specialist fields so yeah  and again you can take this  um  as a positive inspiration and say wow i  can do it on my own you can become an  expert in architecture you totally can't  really  um  you know and of course it can be  incredibly discouraging and demoralizing  we realize nobody is going to help me  i'm all alone yeah it's really it's  saddening and certainly for people who  spend a huge amount of a huge amount of  money so uh really is commenting that  for topics like neuroscience although  there's an initial mass of information  the main barrier is actually putting the  information into context um  and certainly he says as soon as he sees  applications everything makes sense so  ray  i know what you're saying but my  interpretation is different i think the  problem you're describing is that those  books are badly written  a lot of books in the sciences are very  very poorly written and i've been with  people also where i'm helping them  because english isn't their first  language often i mean what you're saying  there like explaining something  in context that well that's the art of  being an author right like how do you  how do you describe to someone how to  pick their pocket how to be a pickpocket  well most pickpockets aren't poets  they're not really good at writing a  description of exactly how pickpocketing  works they can show you but it's a  different talent most people in the  sciences they're just terrible with that  they suck at making it comprehensible so  yeah and that comes up i mean for me as  someone who cares a lot about politics i  often laugh out loud with both lawyers  and economists because you know  something that's politically important  but the person writing about it is a  lawyer or as an economist like oh my god  they can't they can't put the words  together in a way that's going to make  sense yeah  and i have experienced that in a  professional context too professional  writing and professional editing so yeah  and in case you hadn't noticed not  everyone's got the gift of the gab to do  what i'm doing right now too so you know  no but i i do think that's that's the  challenge and you know  uh i've known some very stupid people  who got phds in in neuroscience um  there's one i knew personally  so that's my actual story i don't want  to tell there are very few things i've  kept private in my life  um  but you know sam harris  complete imbecile look up what his phd  is in  so you know if you think idiots can't  get those phds even in a formal setting  and  would it take you two years to know more  about neuroscience more about neurology  than sam harris knows i think you could  do it in six months you know my point  being is samurais is a very ignorant and  competent person who does have a phd in  that field um  so you know uh these things are out  there and you know uh  all right sorry i i said this aside  oh  um  [Music]  we've certainly set  we've certainly established the the  picture frame very well here now for the  picture i'm going to paint you know in  response to this so so what a terrible  challenge we're all living with being in  a world where it's all up to you it all  comes down to the politics of one the  culture of one standing up and defying  the expectations of the society you're  born into whether that be indonesia  malaysia mexico  the united states or europe where you  have to stand up and you have to defy  the expectations of your parents the  expectations of your deceased ancestors  the expectations of authority figures  where you have to be someone who's  willing  to wear unfashionable clothes  not because you're uh not because you're  indifferent to fashion but because  you're you're setting your own trend  your own sense of style is uh is  challenging and overturning the fashions  of the time you are someone who is going  to transcend the times you live in  rather than you know living your life  obeying the dictates of the conformist  society that surrounds you and you  happen to be born in a time when  the institutions have no wisdom to offer  you they have no help they have no  guidance to offer you but on the other  hand  what used to be the exclusive power  uh exclusive privilege of being in that  institution it's become readily  available  via the internet or just on paper you  can order books via you can order them  on amazon you know this kind of thing  it's it's a book but you still got that  book through the internet the internet  has made book shopping a lot easier and  a lot more effective well you know there  was a time when there was just one  library you could go to to read a  particular book just to have access to  the tax just have the opportunity to  educate yourself and now you can do that  in the comfort of your own home while  sitting on the toilet you know the  extent to which uh that side of has been  made easy or can't be exaggerated um  i have said though that one of the most  precious things is encouragement and  this question is not about encouragement  this question is about method let's talk  about method and we're going to talk  about encouragement  there are a lot of people making money  on the internet giving advice about  language learning  not any other kind of learning in my  opinion i guess i guess i can think of  one channel that was doing the same  thing  with studying for the med medical school  exams so there are a few but language  learning is a big example there i feel  right studying for  universities exams studying for med  school there are a few other little  areas where people are making money out  of  offering you the secrets offering you  the key to success in in this kind of  study  um  and one of the comments i've made again  and again is that no matter how bad  their advice is no matter how flawed  their method is  often what people are paying for and  what they're appreciating what they're  getting from it is just encouragement  because that is in fact what they really  need what they need is not  details on method it's encouragement and  with many of these things not all but  many you can say well if you're  positively motivated enough  you're going to learn anyway no matter  how bad the method is there are limits  we can come up with a method of language  learning that's so terrible  that it's going to be counterproductive  now there are details if you watch the  videos there are details of my advice on  learning languages and contrast other  people's advice  and you'll my my advice is not going to  make me a million dollars people make  people make millions of dollars given  this kind of advice the internet well  i'm not one of them but just a very  technical  example one of the pieces of advice i've  given is go to the index of your  language textbook and memorize all the  vocabulary first so you memorize you  know just the nouns and nouns and verbs  i guess you know so you really can  recognize and know the meaning of these  words first and then  do the language exercises now i'm going  to get to live up to my own hype here  babe could you pass me the book that's  under that keyboard there so i have a  very boring language textbook here for  spanish this is brand new i think  arrived yesterday uh  i don't think it has an index i would  have to go through i wonder if the  vocabulary is listed somewhere i'd have  to go and extract the vocabulary somehow  okay  so uh but that would be an example where  i'd be saying okay memorize all the  words first then do the sentence forming  exercises because then  anyway your experience of learning your  experience doing this is very very  different okay so there's some very  unpopular advice i've never heard anyone  else  i'm just being honest with you i've  never that's how i taught myself pally  well it's not the only thing i did but i  memorized every single word that was in  uh at least three pali textbooks maybe  more  and then i did the exercises and then i  read the articles and yes i mean so this  is not the only field i have experience  and it was peculiar then when i met  um people with phds in the field who  knew so much less than i did now i'm  just being real with you all the people  with phds i knew and even the buddhist  monks i knew they also hadn't even  learned the alphabet for pally they  hadn't learned how to read and write the  orthography  different story so it's  kind of amazing how the rudimentary  basic elements of learning were being  ignored in the 21st century perhaps  that's true of other fields  um  perhaps it's not  uh  so  you know  there is this sense in which method is  exaggerated in its importance because  it's the aspect that you can monetize  it's the aspect that i can get you to  pay to learn on the internet the  different kinds of gurus can say well  pay me and i'll teach you the method  with this simple trick and then on the  other hand method becomes this kind of  mask that's worn over the face of just  providing encouragement now again very  briefly i think all of you would agree  this is true with fitness advice like  what they tell you is  pay me and i will treat you i will teach  you the method i will teach you the  technique of how to lift weights  how much technique is there really most  people who are paying a personal trainer  it's not method it's not i'm sorry have  you ever done squats with the with a bar  like you know gee do you know how to do  an arm curl do you know how to do a  bench press like really you need  something you need to pay someone every  week to stand next to you while you're  doing a bench press well you do need it  but not for method you're doing that for  encouragement right oh i've got to be at  the gym on time i've got to be at the  gym at three o'clock because that's when  my that's my personal trainer  whatever it is you're and you're doing  it partly so that you don't let them  down and you're doing your best and one  of the most common things the person  interested they just tell you to lift  more they just tell you to try it if you  were there alone you wouldn't give it a  100 but because that person is there  staring at you you give it a 100  a lot of this you can say about language  learning too now i'm going to go back i  don't think it's true about life in mind  i'll say it so in a second  you know i've said this to melissa  recently if you join the us army and you  go to their defense language institute  they do quote unquote open door study  and they have a guard  marching up and down the hall  looking in your door at you once every  couple minutes to see that you're  studying now you're sitting at a desk  you could be sitting there sexually  fantasizing you could be you know you  can your mind can be one you see they're  holding a pen and all you're thinking  about is kinky sex or something you know  there's no there's no they're not really  forcing you to study but you know this  is an example now are we going to praise  this as as method as methodology again  it is a method open door study in the us  military it's a method but really what  we're talking about here is is  encouragement and a lot of people need  a lot of encouragement  and you can probably say i'm one of  these really rare people where i don't  or i don't anymore after the alluded to  reality of look i didn't start out with  all the right answers i failed and  failed and failed and i learned through  a lot of failure i don't need anyone to  encourage me you know just even at this  university give me the library card and  watch me go i don't even want to help me  i can do the research i can write the  essay i mean  no one has been better prepared for phd  level studies than i am including my  background by the way as a professional  editor when i was an editor editing  other people's phd theses like there are  all these things i've experienced with  it prepare  yes but mysteriously there's no way for  me to get into any masters or phd  program in our incredibly corrupt and  broken uh education system but look i  i'm in having this brief aside to say  well i don't need a lot of  encouragement still  the little bit of encouragement i do  need is decisive  it matters and i recognize most people  at every age you think it's hard at 19.  i don't know this guy's about exactly  hp's about 19 the guy wrote this letter  to me if you think you need a lot of  encouragement 19 how much encouragement  you think 65 year olds need if you're 65  and you're just getting started on  chinese you're 65 and you're trying to  learn about economics you're 65 and  you're trying to learn about politics  and you're 65 and you're challenging  misconceptions  you've had since you were 19. a false  assumptions you'd oh oh  you know you're having to turn those  corners it's very uncomfortable it's  very difficult people in their 60s need  a lot of encouragement to to develop  intellectually so it's not it's not just  it's not just at age 19 it's not just  when you're young  that you need that but look you know um  i got fan mail the other day and i i  responded completely politely and  pausedly but i got fan mail about my  chinese uh language education uh uh  videos so i got uh um  someone writing and saying hey i really  appreciate these videos you did to help  people learn chinese and he had some  specific requests  uh most of them used traditional chinese  he said could you provide also  simplified training  whatever you see the videos some of them  have both some of them but  most of the ones i made when i was in  taiwan most of them had both simplified  traditional i remember dividing the  screen so i wrote back in a totally  positive friendly way saying hey you  know  part of me wants to say hey [ __ ] you  part of me wants to say do you have any  idea how much work it is to make those  videos and i get nothing positive back  in my life from it you know and i don't  make those language education videos  anymore for chinese and i it's not just  that i'm not planning to i plan  not to  and there's real bitterness and  disappointment in me from my experience  with a whole series of languages chinese  isn't the only one and what i got back  from that study i've made other videos  talking about that  um  so even though i only need a little bit  of encouragement and i'll tell you  during that time in my life so i was  living in taiwan let's say two and a  half years ago three years ago some of  that two and a half years ago three  years ago  if i had known  one person in taiwan who would have just  chatted with me in facebook messages in  chinese like helped me improve my  chinese by chatting in chinese by the  facebook instrument  that would have been enough in korea i  could have had one person if i had known  one person  who lived in taiwan and spoke chinese  and was a vegan activist  i would have been so happy to make  youtube videos not just about language  education but about vegan activism vegan  politics and that one all these other  interests i have if i know one person i  mean back in my days of doing buddhism  if i'd known one person in taiwan  there's many years earlier but i was  also in taiwan many years earlier so  like 10 years earlier if i'd know one  person who spoke chinese and cared about  buddhism they were a scholar of buddhism  or a  religious buddhist person and they'd  help me learn chinese in connection to  buddhism and some buddhist temple or  something  that encouragement could have changed my  whole life with that at that stage right  if i'd known one person who helped me  with lotion as a language one person to  help me with cambodia there never was  even one person  i got to say this there never was one  person helping me before youtube i can't  say before the internet because the  internet was part of my life before was  on youtube but it was a much smaller  problem  there was never one person encouraging  me or helping me before youtube and  there's never been one person  after i got involved with youtube  and this is not a humble brag  on the contrary there have only been  women trying to [ __ ] me  and that includes the women who were  shrewd enough and intelligent enough to  pretend that they wanted to help me with  my intellectual endeavors to pretend  that they wanted to help me with  studying languages or sometimes other  ambitions i had  those women also with the passage of  time it was revealed they were really  just trying to sleep with me they were  trying to have sex with me um  still good advice if you're trying to  seduce me  tell melissa seduce me melissa  said she was interested in my writing  and so but if you're trying to seduce me  and you're not an intellectual  pretend you know  because i'm way more likely to reply to  that email if you write to me actually  showing interest in my my writing my  research my intellectual work study of  languages you're trying to help me with  something okay so look um  my point is this i'm saying this  self-critically yes i can describe  myself as someone with a very high level  of capacity to be an auto didact to be  self-teaching self-centered right okay i  can describe myself some with a very  high level of initiative to just go out  and learn things so you know i've been  talking to melissa about this it's like  look it can't all be my initiative like  okay  like with me oh you want to know more  about the stock market you want to have  a career in economics okay bang bang  bang i've got the books but i'm rolling  on it already and i'm passionate about  it even even though it's not the most  beautiful theme of i have so much  passion and initiative to put into  economics real estate law school film  school film making like at any given  time i have all this kind of passion and  initiative that i can pour into many  different things it doesn't have to be  uh it's one thing i have all i have all  this initiative and i'm gonna okay  but i would never say i'm someone who  doesn't need encouragement these are  counter examples where i did need  encouragement and i asked for  encouragement i was seeking  encouragement i needed people to help me  and i didn't get it  and it had a decisive influence in my  life whether or not i'm sad about it now  look sorry also within this uh youtube  channel's history um  i don't i'm just being honest i don't  think i emotionally feel any kind of way  about this  but this youtube channel is called a ba  le  hilariously mispronounced by nicotto  avocado  with a long history okay long history of  people struggling to pronounce the name  of this channel  why do you think it was called that  because i thought that atheism and  religion was going to be the major focus  of this channel  i have never had any encouragement from  any of the other atheist youtubers  including ones i reached out to and said  hey look i really want to appear on your  podcast i really want to talk to you  about buddhism and atheism  or meditation and atheism there are many  different things i'd love to talk to  someone else about it i'd love to  collaborate with someone else about i  never had any positivity back and never  had had any encouragement now i'm not  going to get into a digression about  the toxic relationship between myself  and the vegans of the 21st century  it would be a little bit more lengthy  than just saying i never had anything  positive there was a little bit positive  but there was way more negative it is  what it is but my point is yes even for  someone like me encouragement matters so  i'm not diminishing that and i'm not uh  dismissing it  now  coming back something melissa said about  an hour ago and i said at that time okay  i will come back to that later  melissa briefly said that part of the  problem is just knowing what to read  as opposed to knowing what's crap  knowing what's biased knowing what  somebody's like in order to educate  yourself in this way how can you even  know what to read or how to read it and  that's you know and then we got into the  discussion of of doubt you know  um and doubting your sources and  doubting authority and regarding you  know behind all authority is mere  authorship you don't regard a book as an  authority on a subject you just  recognize you know this book was written  by a particular person he was a  complicated man with complicated  motivations and you know  you take it from there you know were you  really personalize the author of the  book and understand even if the author  of the book is trying to be as honest  towards you as possible and trying to be  as helpful towards you as possible he or  she may not be that actually there may  be many different levels of deception  and self-deception involved many  different levels of dishonesty i think a  great example of that um  is the relationship between jordan  peterson  and a notorious book called hitler's  table talk  so it's now been proven so hitler's  table talk  this is kind of uh allegedly the final  philosophical statement from adolf  hitler  what do you know a bunch of crazy nazis  produced several very different versions  of the text because the nazis were a  very eccentric bunch there was it wasn't  wonderful unified philosophy in that  sense different people wanted to write  or rewrite the words of adolf hitler in  very different ways and jordan peterson  is completely unskeptical and unaware of  this peterson just kind of you know  um  stumbles through this in a very  unsophisticated and and unskeptical way  well you know like  and with this same tendency to rewrite  history um  you know who are you going to find who's  really going to be honest with you about  communism in china who are you you know  those those simple questions that that  kind of doubt and that ability to uh  ability to to  oh  the sensitivity to how unreliable your  sources are you know and and developing  that and we've already said that's not  something you're ever going to get from  university it's not something that's  going to be handed to you by an  authority figure you're more likely to  develop it despite university it's  realizing that your professors are lying  to you realizing your parents are lying  to you realizing your priest is like  it's more likely to give you that sense  of wanting to interrogate these sources  and compare multiple sources and  figuring out who's lying why who has  what agenda you know uh so on and so  forth but yeah the extent to which  things are unknowable just because of  that kind of that kind of bias that's a  huge huge barrier and it's not just a  barrier to being an autodesk it's a it's  a part of the  the intellectual life  um and this does relate again to the  fundamental question of why learn a  foreign language that wasn't asked here  so i'm a method of learning a language  he's presuming already he's motivated so  language is not just a method of  communication okay  language is not just a way of talking  it's not just a way of reading it's not  just a way of writing it's not just a  way of learning okay a language is a way  of thinking  and a language is even a way of feeling  like there are aspects of sentiment and  sentimentality that you only understand  through language and i think that's why  anthropology is meaningless  anthropology being the study of foreign  cultures and effect cultural  anthropology  you know it's really meaningless when  you don't learn the language when you  don't learn to think in that language  and feel in that language and perceive  the world in knowledge i'll give you a  really crude example um but  it's a very palpable example some some  are quite sophisticated and subtle and  it takes some time to flesh out in many  many of the languages of  southeast asia  the way for boyfriend and girlfriend to  speak to each other the way for young  lovers like for teenagers to refer to  each other  they are sexualized terms that  explicitly say  that like the male is an older relative  to the female it's like uncle and niece  kind of stuff right now it's different  southeast asia is a big area and you can  look at each language  both japan and korea this is east asia  not southeast asia this weird stuff uh  not quite older brother younger sister  they have this very strange vocabulary  and it's also interesting that many of  these languages and cultures  even if the male is younger than the  female i mean if people meet when  they're in high school or they may be  just a few months younger but um it's  it's such a common thing in romance in  south korea that it's now used as a joke  is for the younger man to say to the  the female so yes i'm six months younger  than you  but i want you to call me older brother  how much to come  because in there that's you know like i  don't want you to you know i want you to  look at me as a potential romantic  partner okay this is built  i don't approve  i don't i don't approve what can i tell  you i mean cultural anthropology is  [ __ ] up you know you're looking at all  this stuff  you know as an outsider looking in if  you don't actually learn the language  and live life again this is a very crude  example right  it's a way of it's not just a way of  talking not just way of reading natural  writing it's a way of learning it's a  way of being ignorant it's a way of  ignoring things right like language also  how it lets you ignore problems lets you  conceal problems right but  you know  the way in which  family roles and being older versus  being younger age gap relationship the  way that sexualized and is built into  the languages and is building the  culture okay  something more sophisticated the whole  vocabulary of communist ideology in  southeast asia was buddhist  during the cambodian revolution during  the cambodian civil war it was buddhist  vocabulary buddhist phrasing and even  buddhist liturgical formulas  that were used to teach and preach the  precepts of communism  it was explicitly taravata buddhist  now to appreciate that you've got to  study cambodia and you've got it you've  got to have  i don't approve it's really [ __ ] up  right okay but jeff's saying very  interesting now already though look i've  had the experience of studying that it's  not obvious i also studied cambodian lav  pardon me i also studied the history of  communism and laos the history of  communism in china not just the history  of communism okay you recognize this wow  to an extent  that um  to an extent that an outsider would be  unaware of the way people understood  communism in this culture and got  committed to this ideology right it  happened  through buddhism buddhism like an  intermediate ideology  huh  to what extent do italians  think about communism  in catholic terms today  to what extent do white americans in  california  actually take  spiritual terms whether specifically  christian or broadly hippie spirituality  and think about communism think about  marxism think about economics in that  way today like the exercise you can see  i had a workout doing politics and  languages in southeast asia and then i  look with a different kind of acumen and  insight on our own tradition and i can  see right away mmt  modern monetary theory modern magical  thinking about economics left-wing  people sometimes they're left-wing  people buying into right-wing hype right  the idea of the government giving  everyone a salary every month this was  right-wing libertarianism this is  friedman's idea forget the monthly check  from the government what what what do  they sell it as now  ubi universal basic income right so  universal that was a right-wing  libertarian idea but now it's been taken  up by the left wing mmt and ubi and  believing that money is infinite  and um the so-called zeitgeist movement  i think we just passed the 10th  anniversary they were huge on that  oh  you know now again  english is my first language  but in a sense the distance i have from  that by working on another language and  another ideology right that prepares me  for looking at that oh gee i noticed you  guys are actually using deeply christian  or deeply spiritual and magical the way  you're describing this the way you're  setting this up and teaching this  actually  you know you're thinking about this in  this in this religious way so you know  these are examples um  my point being  there's a lot there you're never gonna  really understand or appreciate without  working through  a foreign language and that encounter  with foreign language foreign history  foreign politics it very directly  deepens your analysis of your  understanding of your own  history uh language and politics and the  the way they interact even if that's  only because it estranges you from your  own history language and politics it  gives you more distance it gives you  more detachment it gives you more of a  gap  uh to work across paradoxical as or not  as as that may seem  [Music]  um  you know  i've got to say though  i don't think you can develop as  intellectual by having someone stand  over your desk and invigilate you you  know so this came up under several  different headings in this in this  conversation in this video i don't think  that coercion  or supervision or that kind of  relationship to authority i don't think  that ever does it for the life of the  mind  and look let's come back to our original  examples um  i don't think aaron janus could have  developed in that way  being compelled being observed i don't  think nina and randa could have  developed in that way  and  uh  you know  i think there's a very simple reason  as to why  i think that so much of this kind of  learning has to do with doubt  it has to deal with not overcoming  uncertainties  but embracing them and exploring them  so very briefly if you have an army unit  and they've all got to charge at the  enemy they've all got to run into an  enemy who's shooting bullets at them  they're going to actually run over to  the enemy side and try to kill the enemy  in a time of war  there is a sense in which the commander  is you know there's nothing to do with  doubt or self-doubt or consideration hmm  what are the odds you know and  many periods of our history this has  been a mass phenomenon hundreds of men  at a time and thousands of men at a time  charging directly into bullets whether  they're coming out of rifles or cannons  they're firing straight at them and  that's  that's what war relied upon um  what you got a better way to photo or  you got a better way to  well right now is not the time to  philosophize about it you know so i  understand there are circumstances where  you're getting rid of doubt and where a  certain kind of relationship of  authority has to do that but you can't  really do the opposite you can't coerce  someone into doubting and exploring  those doubts that that's something that  has to come from within so i'm not  saying the will to learn i'm not saying  the desire to learn i'm saying the free  play of of doubt now  it obviously applies to these more  advanced topics in the life the mind  politics history science you know  whatever you know and just even ask  yourself how do we know that you know  this author seems so certain that he  seems so convinced but how did he come  to that college what's that based on it  can be just that kind of doubt you know  you know and just even ask is there  another school of thought i can i can  contrast this to you know challenging  the implicitly dogmatic thinking that's  often built into textbook writing or  into the writing of history uh so and so  forth you know  um but actually for me even with  language i think even in the process  of studying a language is that the way  chinese people really say that is that  sentence written away for that reason is  that character written that way for that  reason the etymology of chinese  characters there's a lot of there's a  lot of room for doubt should i you know  well the textbook tells me i should  think of this word as being equivalent  to this word in english  but it doesn't seem that way to me is  that how i should think of it look like  i know this may seem strange but there's  actually a lot of self-doubt and exam  doubting your textbook and doubting  examination then whether you google it  or contrast it or ask someone who speaks  the language fluently and hold by the  way asking people who speak the language  fluently that leads to all kinds of  false information they tell you oh no  never say it this way only say it that  way and  you know you can get so much so much  false information so that that's what  i'd say is that um  you know obviously most people are lazy  most people are not motivated enough and  then it's easy to fantasize about  solving this problem by having someone  else motivate you or having someone else  do the thinking for you but even with  language learning and even more with the  other aspects of the life of the mind uh  that's exactly you can never  rely on coercion or an expert to to to  do this for you it's what you have to do  yourself and of course it'd say the same  little failure right someone else can't  fail for you like it's one thing to say  you have to try yourself you you have to  have the effort you have to the  initiative to try but you also have to  have the initiative to get out and fail  and then examine those failures analyze  those failures learn from those failures  right that's really something  so you know um  and it's something you can't buy  something you can't have a teacher do  for you or or any other expert can't uh  can't provide provide for you in that  way yeah so anyway um  all right i'm going to read some  comments from the audience if any of you  guys want to want to comment speak now  or hold your piece  um  you know if so this is a 19 year old  approximately right into me asking this  question you know if somebody asks you  how do you read a book  how do you learn i mean i know it's just  partly about language but you know what  do you  what do you say to someone he's asking  me about how  and mostly i'm answering about why  right and i think you guys know  i think you guys know i'm i'm giving  this you know i'm giving this kind of  answer  because you know i think that the why  matters a lot more than the than the how  um  [Music]  and be honest with you too when i've met  people  who had the wrong methods  i think it almost always was because  they had the wrong motivations you know  why didn't you question this textbook  why didn't you question what you were  learning well it's normally because you  had an agenda because you had a  motivation  uh leading you the wrong way and and the  maybe the most important part of his  answer pardon me maybe the most  important part of his question we did  talk about at great length and that was  the part uh talking about overcoming  uh overcoming what you find daunting  about it we talk about what exactly is  daunting about it and i feel that what  is daunting about it is not knowing how  much is this going to take with me you  know you know another great example that  is swimming you can met people who have  never swam in their life never learn to  swim of course it's daunting you could  die you can drown like in five minutes  you can die swimming whether it's in a  pool or in the ocean that can be the end  of your life of course it's daunting you  see other people doing it effortlessly  but how much is it going to take out of  me to learn to swim and if you don't  have any experience doing anything like  that  is this going to be many months of hard  work  and it's  it's just the the unfamiliarity of it  pardon me the unfamiliarity of it makes  it inestimable and when it's inestimable  it's daunting but sometimes i was saying  to melissa the fact that melissa has  this experience with chinese means that  russian would not be daunting for a  totally different  skill set you know what i mean and the  the experience i have with cambodia  or uh the relationship studying the  relationship between ancient rome and  the writing the american constitution  that's why it would not be daunting for  me to do politics in history of central  asia you know so in in that way i think  that's that's probably the most  important uh part of the part of the  answer but if someone actually asked me  the question so methodologically how do  you study the relationship between rome  and the american constitution and even  if i say well get out there and fail how  do you know when you failed you know  it's these are tough questions you know  or you're going to live your whole life  laboring under the delusion that you  succeeded when uh when really you've uh  you've failed  okay so totally down earth question here  marco asks uh marco is curious to know  do i study pop culture slang and street  speech when studying a foreign language  so uh marco okay maybe this is useful  people maybe that's not the resources  available to me the materials available  were very different in these different  languages um  when i worked on lotion  there were very few books  written in high quality contemporary lao  and i concluded the main thing for me to  study was probably karl marx was the  writing of karl marx translated into  lotion there were not many books written  at a really high quality high level of  seriousness about politics or anything  else i was like well i can read desk  habits out in lotion  um  you know the the  when i lived in phnom penh cambodia  i was listening to and  listening to is mr representation i was  very carefully studying rap music  in cambodia in kamai  and i mean it's very slow process so i  got the dvds where you have the lyrics  written on screen and they're speaking  very fast you're writing it out so you  have to pause  and write it out and you know the the  screen would go to sleep because it's  not expecting you to pause you're  pausing you're writing out using you're  doing the analysis and then learning and  hearing and hearing the music back so i  mean those are two extreme examples  um  in terms of what you have to work with  right now for contemporary chinese you  know the lectures of xi jinping in  chinese periodically he gives a lecture  multiple times per year he'll give a  lecture he speaks very clear very slow  chinese melissa was trying to listen to  a news report chinese  it was mumble city it was totally  mumbling i said how can you listen to  this well you know  xi jinping when he gives these formal  lectures to the whole of china you know  of course you get the transcription too  you can get it with subtitles well i  don't mean english themselves you get  the chinese written out but he speaks  very clearly  um  you know so that's that's a resource you  can use  uh but you know and look sorry if you're  really getting into it also there's  many of these languages the relationship  between  formal written language and local  dialect  that can be a big issue so you know do  people in the street is the street  language  of laos the same as the written language  depends which street you're talking  about because laos is fragmented into 48  different languages and you know uh with  chinese  could go on a big monologue here very  often the language people are speaking  is very very different from the language  that's that's written so the the  theoretical language is very different  from the practical launch and then you  have to ask yourself how much time do  you want to spend on one or the other  and what resources do you actually have  how is it actually possible for you to  study uh one or the other yeah so tough  practical questions melissa we have a  gap here is there is there something  else you want to add or a question you  want to raise or else because i i  recognize we've partly answered this  question and probably haven't but look  you know i feel sorry for the actual guy  who sent in this letter the main  video i'd recommend was why i'm forcing  you to read aristotle so there is a  video on this channel and it is a  somewhat meandering video it is a  conversational video it's not a  hard-hitting direct answer  but  you know  maybe that shows my reckless optimism  that you yes you can read through cities  and read errors so i can give i give a  specific  uh list of exactly what books you should  read and you can develop out of that  intellectually now for melissa it wasn't  easy  but you did the work and ultimately you  got the results yeah  yeah  yeah i don't know if i  i do appreciate that i had your  influence from this art with chinese  yeah knew you had already gone through  the process of finding resources and  finding what resources weren't any good  uh  so  i know earlier you said not to digress  into  how you motivated me to to study chinese  but  just from the start you know you  introduced me to uh  pimsleur things that i could listen to  initially to get language exposure so  this is and it was also warning her  about how each method had its advantages  in this venture so you mentioned  pimsleur but i remember saying well look  if you listen to this here's the problem  yeah yeah yes so from the start when you  first met me uh you know i had to think  about  studying chinese and and  this process because  i had studied german in high school but  i knew that it would be a different  level of difficulty a different level of  seriousness with chinese  partly because of the difficulty of the  language but also partly because i was  living there and because i was living  with an intellectual i was living with  someone who was going to  demand  you know a certain standard of you know  intellectual ability so  i just say um  i appreciate that i had your input and i  had somebody to guide me along the way  and i i know most people i recognize  that most people don't have that  so i i just say um  i i do think that this is a good  suggestion though you talk about with  the lectures from xi jinping  um you know because it's uh this is just  pragmatic what resources but i you know  i in conversations that i've had uh  where you you are involved  you know this this idea of uh learning a  second language through politics i don't  see it very much online so but i i find  it really interesting and  uh just this morning i was reading you  know i was listening to the news in  chinese trying to uh learning about  these different places that i'm already  learning about ukraine and the situation  with russia but if i learn it in another  language you know that that just brings  more into my life and you know i'm  someone who enjoys you know talking  about politics so i know it's not for  everybody but still um you know i think  it's a real world  application and it's something that  you're you're hearing uh in the news  every day so  yeah  that's what happened  um  you know i mean i think you were briefly  alluding to or or touching on something  there which i haven't covered at all in  this video  which is just  you know what is your standard  for what's good enough  and i mean you said there in passing  living with living with isil mazar  living with a real intellectual living  with this particular intellectual you  knew you were someone who had very high  standards for you  and i think we can all agree that part  of the problem for nina and randa part  of the problem for aaron janus part of  the problem for vegan gains richard  is that they've lived in a situation  sometimes they've chosen to live in a  situation but they've been living in a  situation where everyone has really low  standards for them everyone says oh good  for you good for you everyone's happy  that you're childish everyone's happy  that you showed up  where no one's demanding excellence of  you and you're not  learning to demand  excellence of yourself and you know  um  [Music]  if you're the kind of person who wants  to know what happened with napoleon i'm  sorry but it's a good example like oh  you know i was at the airport the other  day and there's this best-selling  history of napoleon  and i bought it and i read it and it was  great that's great now i feel like wow  now i know about what happened with  napoleon you know  whether you call this methodology or not  no you have to have the attitude of this  isn't good enough like you have to be  dissatisfied you know  you have to demand excellence of the  authors you're reading and of yourself  and it's not even really just excellence  it's just  being dissatisfied just knowing this is  not good enough this is just some book i  picked up at the airport  and frankly knowing this this author is  lying to me he has some agenda and by  the way the the author may just may just  be a french nationalist they may just be  trying to convince you that france is  the most wonderful country in the world  a lot of time that's the bias like it's  not even something like communism it's  not a clear political agenda it's just a  generalized sense of wanting to glorify  france and glorify napoleon and  encourage tourism like really their  agenda might be they want you to visit  certain historical sites in france and  tell you how wonderful those are that  can be the agenda you know but um  you know  the sense of demanding more  and you know this isn't the whole story  and something's being  concealed for me here even if it's  through incompetence you know and that's  an attitude you can take to reading  science textbooks we talked about  nutrition before as an example i mean  even seemingly boring factual sciences  obviously do history politics and to  language also you know  this is what i'm being told this is what  i'm not being told  now you know i just say a different  person could say well i had nothing to  read at the airport  and i bought this popular history of  napoleon  but i'm reading it and i know  i know it's  not telling me the whole story  you know the word slavery only appears  in the whole book twice  well what about slavery you know what  about haiti what about black people  let's be blunt what about napoleon's  racism toward black people  and you know there was this chapter that  made a big deal of the fact that  napoleon wasn't anti-semitic that he had  relatively positive attitudes towards  jews but then you know the part that  described what napoleon actually did in  egypt  and what he actually did in haiti in his  relationships with slavery and black  people and arabs  you know it got real vague it got  relevant  you know  huh you know like  where you're not satisfied you're  demanding more  you know um  i mean maybe that's what this whole  video should have been about like i'm  sorry this is just coincidental i'm  saying at the end right but i mean what  melissa has had with me is someone who  was tutoring her in having that attitude  so i have mentioned this before but  years ago on the channel when we went to  greece so we were briefly in athens  greece melissa did read and she actually  typed out a short history textbook on  history of greece so it was it was  exactly the kind of book you'd get in an  airport to read it it was a joke hey  here's the history of grace making it  easy for you like it wasn't some kind of  incisive hard-hitting  book  but uh i said to melissa as soon as i  started reading it don't you realize the  author is a communist and she was  shocked melissa knew a lot about  communism she studied the history of  communism in china it didn't occur to  her at all that she was reading  communist propaganda about greece and i  immediately started giving her examples  only a communist would say this or some  far left socialist who's almost a  communist this has real crazy propaganda  elements and you said there were there  were many different things about it that  were communist propaganda  uh  but one of the things i asked was don't  you notice how strange  the pro-turkish bias of this history was  like a large part of the history of  greece is war with turkey you know  ancient modern medieval and every in  every period don't you notice he's going  out of his way to tell you again and  again how pro-turkish he is and i'm  guessing this is fashionable on the far  left in  in greece right now again i'm not just  criticizing melissa right i'm showing  her  so look i'm sorry guys i honestly i  didn't think about this till now it's  good look it's great most of my videos  most of the time is  is spontaneous but uh jazz  this is the most important part it is  this is the most important part of the  answering question it goes three hours  to get here and you know i think it's  true that has to be applied to the  language textbooks to the lessons  to the reading of history the reading of  posts the reading of science to  everything is this really demanding  thing of of demanding of wanting more of  the books wanting more of your  professors wanting more of the system if  you are in an educational system and  wanting more of the books that happen to  have come into your hands if you're if  you're a self-taught person uh  and you know  part of what's going on there in my mind  is i've said this so many times the  channel sympathy is an analytical tool  right it's unsuccessful when napoleon  accomplished in egypt was glorious and  successful  okay sympathize with the egyptian  perspective right  sympathize with the perspective of an  indigenous person in haiti well can't  say whatever a black liberated slave in  haiti someone who was a slave in haiti  sympathize their perspective take a  moment to  to imagine it you know how did they feel  about napoleon and even you know the war  between napoleon and uh  and austria you know oh this was  glorious this was all wonderful okay if  you were alive in vienna at that time  you know how would you have felt how  would you felt at this stage and how  would you felt this later stage because  the alliance has shifted over time i'm  not going to fill on all the details  here but like you're going to find flaws  in the perspective of the narrator the  perspective of the author the  perspective of the authority figure just  by just by thinking that way  now you know um  the way i was able to learn so much  chinese in a short period of time in in  kunming was obviously of demanding more  of my teachers too  and i said there was a conflict in  school i said look  i'm not doing this i'm not learning this  way one of the teachers she wanted to  give me lessons about driving a car turn  left it was completely boring turn left  to the traffic turn right she wanted to  do these road exercises i said this is  not what i'm paying for this is not what  i flew to china for no  you know  um  you know and i i had this program i  created my own program where i was  writing an essay every day i was doing  original composition and talk about that  i did do rote memorization of vocabulary  but it was vocabulary that was  meaningful to my life and you know you  practice i was practicing speaking  reading and writing every day but it's  like no no i'm not doing fill in the  blank exercise about red light green  light turn left at a traffic  turned left at an intersection you know  we're not going to it was big it was a  big conflict people at the school were  really shocked i'm sorry i could  discover it was it was obviously very  upsetting for the teacher  and um  yeah  i think i think i left a black eye on  that institution a lot of ways but they  also said i mean you know obviously i  was one of the best students that ever  had you know  i was there i could see i could see my  competition i saw people have been  studying there for years  for like five years and they hadn't  learned as much as i learned in five  months you know i got to see those  differences too um but yeah that's hard  because that's that's face-to-face  dealing with an authority figure who  says that they're in charge and they're  an expert in teaching chinese and what  do you know and you say well this is  what i know that's that's hard when  you're alone with the books  it's not hard in that way but you have  to actively imagine these things you  have to actively imagine there is  another perspective here that i'm not  hearing  and  you know again sir with napoleon  it may seem obvious oh there are two  perspectives so i'll give you an example  you're trying to learn about the history  of the vietnam war babe do we where is  that book i've never had time to read  this  woo  yeah remember this remember this still i  haven't read one page  it's too late to get that have you read  one page  many of the books you have most has read  some bits i'm busy i'm writing a book i  don't think  yeah i'd love to i'd love to read that  book there okay it's really easy to look  at vietnam and think oh so there are the  pro-communists and they're the  anti-communists or indeed many people  look at the history of you know think oh  there are the communists and then there  are the americans  allowing yourself to think through first  speculatively first hypothetically and  then to go out and research and see the  other perspective oh no there were some  people who really believed that vietnam  should be a monarchy  i mean it may seem obvious but it's not  that obvious what what was the  perspective  of a traditional  monarchist buddhist  in vietnam and that there were there  were a lot of those oh yeah i guess and  i guess they wouldn't have really  supported american-style democracy and  they wouldn't have supported communism  and maybe they kind of felt like  modernization in general was bad yeah i  guess that must be a significant  political voice right and like oh  wouldn't there have been people in  vietnam who really sincerely were in  favor of democracy  but who had some kind of sophisticated  understanding that there were other  countries around like japan like america  wasn't the only example look at him  we're watching what was that oh yeah i  guess so and now again just  being able to think about that  speculatively being able to sympathize  with it be able to think well if i were  alive at that time this is what i'd be  worried about this is what i'd be  thinking if i were living there  and then going out and investigating  that and getting the other side of it  when i was really a kid i mean this was  uh  i was i was young i was young and naive  i remember when i decided to research  spain  and the role of spain in world war ii  and i was very dissatisfied with what i  found in english because it was a lot of  propaganda from different angles  what which side was spain on in world  war ii getting at that time getting an  honest answer to that simple question  what side was spain  on in world war ii and  step by step month by month  you know  there was propaganda written then there  was propaganda written after that  nobody was all that comfortable and  facing up to what had happened in world  war ii with with spain and you know i  did i did figure it out  and i remember i researched and wrote an  essay about spanish wolfram  it's some of the few things i could find  they were being honest about was oh well  a big part of the concern with spain was  the control of metals and minerals  minerals used to produce steel and  bullets and that was a big thing what  the germans and the british were  competing over with spain there's more  to it than that but i remember you know  i'm just being real with you why did i  do that  i'd already read a lot about world war  ii including the history textbooks  i was given in canada  right and i noticed they were evasive  about spain  i noticed that  you know like they wanted to present the  world as neatly divided into two halves  fascist and anti-fascist now they were  also very evasive about joseph stalin of  course they didn't want to deal with him  well i'm reading all this stuff  and spain is not a small part of europe  and the spanish-speaking countries are  not a small part of the world and  there's a big mystery here out in the  open and it's not mysterious  because it's hard to know it's because  nobody's comfortable talking was already  at that stage i'm just being wrong i was  very immature and i was very stupid back  then i wasn't really much smarter than  nina and randa i wasn't you know  um  but you know i fastened onto that and i  i went into that and i tore that apart  so you know there's a certain kind of  learning that you do maybe by tearing  things apart by their seams where it's  like look i see the crack in this  and that makes me question the whole  facade and now i want to know how and  why that whole facade was was  constructed you know so i think i think  that's part of learning that relates  back to what i said earlier that you  can't get this shortcut by having  someone else stand over you and forcing  you to study that that doubting  and when you get good at it it becomes  systematic down it becomes a system it  becomes a method but at an early stage  it's not i think it really is just uh  the desire to have more and it's having  high standards and that's why it's so  tragic that we have a culture that just  cultivates and encourages childishness  nina and miranda are not the only ones  or people oh just dance dance on  instagram dance on tick tock you know  enjoy yourself live life and with men it  may not be dancing but just drink  alcohol just watch sports think about  the extent this is childish drinking  beer and watching soccer on tv  this is not fit for a human being it's  not fit for an adult man but this is  this is childishness men men may be  encouraged to go dance in a nightclub  there are some contexts where it's cool  for a man to dance whatever you know but  yeah um  [Music]  anyway  this business of having  relentlessly high standards and asking  how do they know that  why did they choose to tell me that in  that way they being the authors of a  book it's not something the people who  wrote this book why did they tell me  that why are they presenting it that way  and you know australia i'll give you an  example that came up for me recently we  know people taking  antidepressants another psychiatrist  probably all of you do too you know  like  you know  um  you're reading the official fda warning  for this this is the american government  label  the warning for these drugs  and it admits to you  that the cause and effect relationship  of this drug is unknown that the effect  of this drug on the brain its efficacy  is unknown and speculative you know the  etiology of the drug  is unknown and the way they word that  and the way they present it to you  you know where what they are saying is  we do not even know if this drug has any  positive effects at all  and if it does we have no mechanistic  explanation we don't even have a  chemical theory  as to what the cause and effect  relationship is that gives you that  benefit  if there's a benefit that's approved  that's being  admitted to you right  but part of what you got to respond to  is the facade  and yeah there's a crack in the facade  and then questioning why was this  constructed in this way i mean i guess  you know on a very simple level  this is it's a kind of naturalistic  fallacy you have to overturn  people sign up to study chinese and they  act like oh this is the way chinese is  taught this is the way i should learn  chinese  so on for every other language like if  you don't question the authority figures  involved they don't show up and think um  okay about five people had a meeting and  decided this is the way chinese would be  taught in this institution  and why did they decide it this way  they're trying to make the most money  possible  they're trying to do the least work  possible  uh i have no reason to think they even  compared 10 different textbooks they  probably took them the most readily  available maybe it's the most profitable  textbook gee why is it 120 dollars for  this textbook they probably didn't look  around for one that's a good deal for  you maybe they only looked a textbook  that would make the most money for them  for the university institution right  maybe they had no interest in that they  didn't do any research about what was an  effective method to learn chinese and  what wasn't they're not evaluating the  student's commitment they didn't think  about the difference between teaching  chinese to someone whose first language  is japanese teaching chinese somebody's  first language  there's another five people sat down and  it may have just been one or two  meetings they designed the curriculum  for this course very little work  you know you don't say you can accept it  as if it's just the rain falling out of  the sky oh it's raining today  some days it rains there's nothing we  can do about it this is we just adapt we  just live to it these are the conditions  as opposed to having that skeptical  attitude  five people  decided this is how chinese is to be  taught now is to be learned  you know again i grew up going to  museums  and it's a long story i went to this one  museum in ottawa at that time it was  called the war museum maybe now it's  called the military history museum of  canada or something they probably have  where they probably gave it a better  name but the museum of war museum of  military history whatever the hell it's  called museum of the army in ottawa  canada  and while i went around the museum i was  laughing and laughing and i admit like  it was a it was an erudite sort of laugh  i don't say  you know i'm laughing because i know the  political history and i know what the  government is lying about in this museum  and just just a bizarre and evasive word  it was a really good looking woman  picked me up because i was laughing she  came over and she spoke to me in french  and i replied to her in french but this  good looking woman came over and we went  out to lunch together  didn't go anywhere but this girly woman  came over and she was like you know she  first said to me in french and then we  started talking  um she was asking you know  why i'm laughing i'm like you know the  answer is guess what i'm not an idiot  you know what i mean like i'm i'm too  sophisticated to take this stuff on the  walls  seriously but you know okay a lot of  people there a lot of people are going  to be bored in that museum because they  walk into that museum and they regard  the circumstances as being like rain and  falling from the sky this is the way it  is this is history this is the history  of world war ii this is the museum this  is what i'm supposed to learn you know  they sit down in a classroom or they buy  a book whether they buy the book at the  air at the airport uh bookstore or they  take it from a library or take it from  amazon oh this is the history of  napoleon this is the history of world  war ii  this is how to learn chinese that may  also be a book  they're not sitting there and  questioning and fundamentally how do i  regard that museum i don't regard it as  an evil conspiracy right i think you  know about five guys sat down in a room  and came up with  what's written on the wall of this  museum  i don't think a whole lot of thought  went into it i don't think a whole lot  of effort went into it you know and  probably some of those guys had a phd in  history  but you can imagine okay this is this is  the history of canada  um  [Music]  what do you want to say about the  genocide of of indigenous people what do  you want to say about those wars it's a  war museum  um okay we gotta come up with about five  paragraphs here on the on the war and  the genesis uh  they weren't geniuses they weren't  putting a lot of thought into it and  again  sympathy sympathy is an analytical tool  what if you were cree what if you were  ojibwe what if you were inuit and you're  the one reading that and you have some  access from stories your grandparents  told you to knowing it didn't really  happen like that you  some  some doubt at least you know that this  is this is so plausible you know  what what are we going to say about  slavery  what are we going to say about the war  with the americans in case you didn't  know it was a warfare opportunity in the  states which is now kind of politically  inconvenient um  vietnam  what was canada's involvement in the  vietnam war and what are we going to say  about  i think five guys talked about it over  lunch and that's part of why this is so  much garbage you know now this isn't  true of all museums some museums there  maybe is a little bit more effort that  goes into it  um but my point is you know  you're living in a world of artificial  and factitious things  i'm aware it's pronounced factious but  if i say fact just it sounds too much  like frack just so i'm over pronouncing  it as factitious by the way these are  things that have been carefully  assembled  for you  and in large part they have been  assembled in order to deceive you or in  order to reassure you or prevent you  asking those difficult questions  um now you know my point is not that i  go into that classroom to study chinese  thinking this isn't how to study chinese  i don't go in with the apprehension or  convention this is not the way to study  change that's not my attitude and my  attitude is not there is a real way to  study chinese and this is the false way  i can't contrast  like you know the the the one true god  to the false gods that's not my that's  not my attitude you know  um my attitude is well five guys came up  with this method of studying chinese  i think another five guys could come up  with a better method  i think 10 people could come up with an  even better method and that's the way i  look at all institutions i mean a museum  is a great example like okay this is  what you chose to tell me about slavery  about genocide about the vietnam war and  you did that for your own reasons again  most of the time it's not a conspiracy  most of the time you just said what you  felt comfortable with saying and what  you thought parents and children would  be comfortable with hearing you know and  you can imagine some oh well the  soldiers fought bravely and everyone  tried their best and there weren't too  many atrocities or crimes against  humanity i mean when you put it in  perspective imagine what kind of  horseshit is on the wall of this  mediocre canadian museum  um  you know but if you just  take this step  of seeing that behind all authority  there is mere authorship  you know there was just one person who  wrote this book or five people who  worked together and they had their  motives and they had their  misconceptions and even if their  intentions were good even if they  thought hey i'm gonna write the best  book i possibly can to help the next  generation understand what happened in  vietnam right that you've got to be in  this way looking at it at this  artificially created facade  and there's something behind the facade  there's something else there there's  something concealed by it  and just as sure as there's something  revealed by it you know there's  something that's going to be features  and it's going to be exaggerated by it  and that your role  is to know better  even at that early incipient stage when  all you can do is doubt better  this isn't the best way to learn chinese  even if i don't know the best way to  learn chinese even if i never know the  best way to learn chinese still  my attitude can be  um  this is i regard what you're offering me  in this institution or what you're  offering me in this book it may just be  a printed book you bought that this is a  kind of cluj this is a kind of um error  sats  half baked concoction put together by a  small number of people in a short amount  of time say hey good enough for now try  it see if it works you know and  some of you might compare this to the  history of philosophy of science but i  think what we're talking about here is  in many ways the opposite of science the  history of science is not like this um  you know  is the world round or is it flat is the  world a semi-sphere is it a it's not  something imperfect sphere or is it or  is it flat you with science you're very  often dealing not always you're very  often dealing with hard criteria for  something being true or false you know  etc etc  and with history with politics with  languages with most of the things that  are involved in life and mind with  judgments about culture  uh  you know we're in a field where instead  it's it's very hard for people to be  honest even when they have absolute best  of intentions even when they're not  trying to deceive you uh or anyone else  yeah so i think i think we did come to a  statement about about methodology after  all after saying all that stuff about  intention and motivation  and how important and encouragement  uh the reason why as opposed to the the  question of how  i think that really is the ultimate  guide to how to the methodology  and you know you have to  um  sorry so we have someone we have someone  in the audience who knows a little bit  about the history of spain yeah  yeah yeah franco you know visited texas  and stuff and it was embarrassing and  confusing for people  why are we supporting this guy how did  he end up on our side what did he do  during world war ii yeah  yeah  and uh well i mean i don't know what's  what's more taboo the history of fascist  spain the history of the military  dictatorship in greece the history of  the dictatorship period in south korea  the history of cambodia i mean there's a  lot of post-war a lot of post-world war  ii stuff where america's position  no it's not it's not that it made no  sense that it's not easy to make sense  of what why was america on the communist  side in cambodia  you know i know most people don't know  but anyway um yeah yeah so no spain in  that way uh  until franco dies of natural causes it's  one of the great paradoxes produced by  world war ii and a great deal of  discomfort uh in retrospect and while it  was and what was happening yeah  and a lot of left-wing people who want  to pose a lot of left-wing people who  want to be holier than that a lot of  communists who want to make misleading  propaganda out of it for other purposes  and a lot of anarchists too the  anarchist view of astrid spain there's  another crazy uh distorting myopic lands  to bring to it anarchists have a lot of  influence and grace too oh yeah thanks  sir i'm glad glad of some people who  read read books  it's not just fans of nina and miranda  that are here in the in the audience  today as we passed the three hour mark  on this on this live stream  um  yeah you know i do think  you know there's there's a fundamental  difference there  between seeing yourself in the process  of education  passively receiving  something meaningful  provided to you by experts whether those  are the authors of books or your  professors and seeing yourself as  someone who is going to destroy  meanings who is going to find those  things meaningful see what's meaningful  about them and then tear them apart  destroy them understand their component  parts understand how they were put  together understand the way in which  they were meant to seem meaningful and  the way in which they are in fact  meaningless  or even are intentionally misleading our  propaganda our lies  all my life my father said to me that  the british empire had accomplished this  amazing thing in the abolition of  slavery  some of you are watching this in  france and you can tell me what kind of  propaganda you grew up with about the  french empire in the aboriginal slavery  but my father 110 subscribed to this  view that the british empire was morally  superior to the americans because of the  british empire's history of slavery and  from my earliest childhood i can  remember not believing him  and raising examples to contradict them  and say no that's not true you know that  can't be true you know that doesn't make  sense when i was a child i didn't know a  lot of examples but i can  give you two i can remember saying but  what about jamaica  now we had jamaicans in downtown the  reason i knew jamaica existed melissa's  visited my neighborhood i didn't have a  whole lot of examples drawn as a little  kid i remember when i learned that sri  lanka existed it was because of uh uh of  repairman i won't tell the whole story  there was one sri lankan man in my  neighborhood who who opened like a  tailor shop and i met him that was the  first time i heard i never heard the  word sri lanka or sinalese before um you  know  what about sri lanka  oh gee now we're starting to get a more  complex view of slavery it's like the  british empire our way because the first  thing i looked at foreign how did they  abolish slavery there what actually what  actually happened oh hmm you know now of  course beyond that who created the slave  trade in the united states  the british empire was a world spanning  but you know my father as an adult  was still preparing this and like i'm  just saying i understand the way in  which that's meaningful to him it's not  entirely meaningless that's what makes  it so dangerous it's meaningful to him  because it gives him a sense of moral  superiority over the americans it gives  him a sense that he was on the right  side of history that yeah yeah the  americans talk about democracy the  americans talk about their revolution in  canada we didn't have that revolution we  didn't we still don't have democracy we  didn't tell any of that but  you know oh here's this this great thing  you could compensate with we're saying  oh but we were the ones who abolished  slavery we didn't have this horrible  civil war the americans had we were so  much more arid in advance and guess what  it's not it's not a total lie it's not a  total fraud the history of the abolition  of slavery the british empire is  interesting  guess what they had colonies in africa  too they had colonies in india it's  really ugly once you get into it guys  um  slavery and then indentured servitude in  the british empire oh it's interesting  you know  but my point is what i did was what my  father could never do he becomes  captivated by this meaning this  pre-fabricated meaning these ready-made  thoughts pretty poncey and french i'm  over pronouncing that too  anyway  in anglo-french you know these  ready-made thoughts these meanings that  have been presented to them by teachers  by professors by political leaders but  by books by textbooks they say hey  here's the way to think here's the  understand history and i'm looking at  that and saying no i'm to tear this  apart  i'm going to find out what's meaningless  about it what's false or misleading  about it i'm going to find out how it  was put together  and again it's not going to be total  fiction most of the time there's going  to be some truth and some fiction i'm  going to find out what's behind it and  you know i'm gonna i'm gonna i'm gonna  contrast it to competing myths it's not  like a simple thing where you can  compare something false to something  true the sciences can be like that you  know flat earth theory is false you know  rounder theory is true some some things  in science like that but this is not  like the sciences you're not going to be  able to just contrast to some other  version of events that's true you're  going to be contrasting mythology to  mythology meaning to meaning and you're  going to tear those apart also and see  the components they're made of and see  how they've been put together and then  and only then you can get involved in  the creation of meetings yourself where  you understand the raw materials you  understand what it is you're working  with and more importantly you start to  understand the motivations of the  authors and i know it sounds crazy but  that even applies to language textbooks  why is this language textbook written  this way why does this teacher teach  this way you know  you know not just politics and history  and so on that's when you start to come  into the role of being an author on your  own and again it's not the point  is not to perceive everything as the  product of a conspiracy the point is not  to debunk everything as propaganda  books are written by complicated people  with complicated motivations and when  you really start learning is when you  tear them apart  and you start to understand those  motivations and you may by the end of  your study  understand those motivations better  than the author him or herself